

HOME  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY 
OF  MODERN  KNOWLEDGE 

No.  S6 

Editors : 

HERBERT    FISHER,  M.A.,  F.B.A. 
Prof.  GILBERT  MURRAY,  Litt.D., 

LL.D.,  F.B.A. 
Prof.  J.   ARTHUR    THOMSON,  M.A. 
Prof.  W.LLIAM  T.  BREWSTER,  M.A. 


A  complete  classified  list  of  the  volumes  tf  The 
Home  University  Library  already  published 
will  be  found  at  the  back  of  this  book. 


THE  PROBLEMS 
OF  PHILOSOPHY 


BY 

BERTRAND    RUSSELL 

M.A.,    F.R.8. 

LECTURER   AND    LATE    FELLOW   OF  TRINITY    COLLEGE 
CAMBRIDGE 


NEW   YORK 
HENRY   HOLT  AND    COMPANY 

LONDON 
WILLIAMS   AND    N  ORG  ATE 


PREFACE 

In  the  following  pages,  I  have  confined 
myself  in  the  main  to  those  problems  of 
philosophy  in  regard  to  which  I  thought 
it  possible  to  say  something  positive  and 
constructive,  since  merely  negative  criticism 
seemed  out  of  place.  For  this  reason,  theory 
of  knowledge  occupies  a  larger  space  than 
metaphysics  in  the  present  volume,  and  some 
topics  much  discussed  by  philosophers  are 
treated  very  briefly,  if  at  all. 

I  have  derived  valuable  assistance  from 
unpublished  writings  of  Mr.  G.  E.  Moore  and 
Mr.  J.  M.  Keynes  :  from  the  former,  as  re- 
gards the  relations  of  sense-data  to  physical 
objects,  and  from  the  latter  as  regards  prob- 
ability and  induction.  I  have  also  profited 
greatly  by  the  criticisms  and  suggestions  of 
Professor  Gilbert  Murray. 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER  PAGE 

I     APPEARANCE   AND   REALITY               .            .  9 

II     THE    EXISTENCE    OF    MATTER           .             .  26 

III  THE   NATURE   OF   MATTER      ...  42 

IV  IDEALISM 58 

V     KNOWLEDGE     BY     ACQUAINTANCE     AND 

KNOWLEDGE    BY    DESCRIPTION    .             .  72 

VI      ON   INDUCTION  .....  93 

Vn     ON      OUR      KNOWLEDGE      OF      GENERAL 

PRINCIPLES         .....  109 

VIII     HOW  A  PRIORI  KNOWLEDGE    IS   POSSIBLE  127 

IX     THE   WORLD   OF   UNIVERSALS  .  .142 

X     ON  OUR  KNOWLEDGE   OF  UNIVERSALS    .  158 

XI     ON  INTUITIVE  KNOWLEDGE  .  .  .174 

vii 


viii  CONTENTS 

OHAPTEB  PAOE 

XII    TRUTH    AND    FALSEHOOD       .  .  .      186 


Xin     KNOWLEDGE,     ERROR,     AND     PROBABLE 

OPINION               .....  204 

XIV     THE    LIMITS    OF    PHILOSOPHICAL    KNOW- 
LEDGE       220 

XV     THE  VALUE  OF  PHILOSOPHY              .            .  237 
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE          .             .            .251 

INDEX 253 


THE 
PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

CHAPTER    I 

APPEARANCE   AND   REALITY 

Is  there  any  knowledge  in  the  world  which 
is  so  certain  that  no  reasonable  man  could 
doubt  it  ?  This  question,  which  at  first  sight 
might  not  seem  difficult,  is  really  one  of  the 
most  difficult  that  can  be  asked.  When  we 
have  realised  the  obstacles  in  the  way  of  a 
straightforward  and  confident  answer,  we 
shall  be  well  launched  on  the  study  of  philo- 
sophy— for  philosophy  is  merely  the  attempt 
to  answer  such  ultimate  questions,  not 
carelessly  and  dogmatically,  as  we  do  in 
ordinary  life  and  even  in  the  sciences,  but 
critically,  after  exploring  all  that  makes  such 

9 


10    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

queitions  puzzling,  and  after  realising  all 
the  vagueness  and  confusion  that  underlie 
our  ordinary  ideas. 

In  daily  life,  we  assume  as  certain  many 
things  which,  on  a  closer  scrutiny,  are  found 
to  be  so  full  of  apparent  contradictions  that 
only  a  great  amount  of  thought  enables  us 
to  know  what  it  is  that  we  really  may  believe. 
In  the  search  for  certainty,  it  is  natural  to 
begin  with  our  present  experiences,  and  in 
some  sense,  no  doubt,  knowledge  is  to  be 
derived  from  them.  But  any  statement  as 
to  what  it  is  that  our  immediate  experiences 
make  us  know  is  very  likely  to  be  wrong.  It 
seems  to  me  that  I  am  now  sitting  in  a  chair, 
at  a  table  of  a  certain  shape,  on  which  I  see 
sheets  of  paper  with  writing  or  print.  By 
turning  my  head  I  see  out  of  the  window 
buildings  and  clouds  and  the  sun.  I  believe 
that  the  sun  is  about  ninety-three  million  miles 
from  the  earth ;  that  it  is  a  hot  globe  many 
times  bigger  than  the  earth ;  that,  owing  to 
the  earth's  rotation,  it  rises  every  morning, 
and  will  continue  to  do  so  for  an  indefinite 
time  in   the  future.     I  believe  that,  if  any 


APPEARANCE  AND  REALITY    11 

other  normal  person  comes  into  my  room,  he 
will  see  the  same  chairs  and  tables  and  books 
and  papers  as  I  see,  and  that  the  table  which 
I  see  is  the  same  as  the  table  which  I  feel 
pressing  against  my  arm.  All  this  seems  to 
be  so  evident  as  to  be  hardly  worth  stating, 
except  in  answer  to  a  man  who  doubts 
whether  I  know  anything.  Yet  all  this  may 
be  reasonably  doubted,  and  all  of  it  requires 
much  careful  discussion  before  we  can  be 
sure  that  we  have  stated  it  in  a  form  that  is 
wholly  true. 

To  make  our  difficulties  plain,  let  us  con- 
centrate attention  on  the  table.  To  the  eye 
it  is  oblong,  brown  and  shiny,  to  the  touch 
it  is  smooth  and  cool  and  hard ;  when  I 
tap  it,  it  gives  out  a  wooden  sound.  Any  one 
else  who  sees  and  feels  and  hears  the  table 
will  agree  with  this  description,  so  that  it 
might  seem  as  if  no  difficulty  would  arise ; 
but  as  soon  as  we  try  to  be  more  precise  our 
troubles  begin.  Although  I  believe  that  the 
table  is  **  really  "  of  the  same  colour  all  over, 
the  parts  that  reflect  the  light  look  much 
brighter   than   the   other   parts,    and   some 


12    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

parts  look  white  because  of  reflected  light. 
I  know  that,  if  I  move,  the  parts  that  rC' 
fleet  the  light  will  be  different,  so  that  the 
apparent  distribution  of  colours  on  the  table 
will  change.  It  follows  that  if  several  people 
are  looking  at  the  table  at  the  same  moment, 
no  two  of  them  will  see  exactly  the  same 
distribution  of  colours,  because  no  two 
can  see  it  from  exactly  the  same  point  of 
view,  and  any  change  in  the  point  of  view 
makes  some  change  in  the  way  the  light  is 
reflected. 

For  most  practical  purposes  these  differ- 
ences are  unimportant,  but  to  the  painter 
they  are  all-important :  the  painter  has  to 
unlearn  the  habit  of  thinking  that  things 
seem  to  have  the  colour  which  common  sense 
says  they  "  really  "  have,  and  to  learn  the 
habit  of  seeing  things  as  they  appear.  Here 
we  have  already  the  beginning  of  one  of 
the  distinctions  that  cause  most  trouble  in 
philosophy — the  distinction  between  "  ap- 
pearance "  and  "  reality,"  between  what 
things  seem  to  be  and  what  they  are.  The 
painter  wants  to  know  what  tilings  seem  to 


APPEARANCE  AND   REALITY    13 

be,  the  practical  man  and  the  philosopher 
want  to  know  what  they  are ;  but  the  philo- 
sopher's wish  to  know  this  is  stronger  than 
the  practical  man's,  and  is  more  troubled  by 
knowledge  as  to  the  difficulties  of  answering 
the  question. 

To  return  to  the  table.  It  is  evident  from 
what  we  have  found,  that  there  is  no  colour 
which  pre-eminently  appears  to  be  the  colour 
of  the  table,  or  even  of  any  one  particular 
part  of  the  table — it  appears  to  be  of  different 
colours  from  different  points  of  view,  and 
there  is  no  reason  for  regarding  some  of 
these  as  more  really  its  colour  than  others. 
And  we  know  that  even  from  a  given  point 
of  view  the  colour  will  seem  different  by 
artificial  light,  or  to  a  colour-blind  man,  or 
to  a  man  wearing  blue  spectacles,  while  in 
the  dark  there  will  be  no  colour  at  all,  though 
to  touch  and  hearing  the  table  will  be  un- 
changed. Thus  colour  is  not  something  which 
is  inherent  in  the  table,  but  something  de- 
pending upon  the  table  and  the  spectator 
and  the  way  the  light  falls  on  the  table. 
When,  in  ordinary  life,  we  speak  of  the  colour 


U    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

of  the  table,  we  only  mean  the  sort  of  colour 
which  it  will  seem  to  have  to  a  normal 
spectator  from  an  ordinary  point  of  view 
under  usual  conditions  of  light.  But  the 
other  colours  which  appear  under  other 
conditions  have  just  as  good  a  right  to  be 
considered  real ;  and  therefore,  to  avoid 
favouritism,  we  are  compelled  to  deny  that, 
in  itself,  the  table  has  any  one  particular 
colour. 

The  same  thing  applies  to  the  texture. 
With  the  naked  eye  one  can  see  the  grain, 
but  otherwise  the  table  looks  smooth  and 
even.  If  we  looked  at  it  through  a  micro- 
scope, we  should  see  roughnesses  and  hills 
and  valleys,  and  all  sorts  of  differences  that 
are  imperceptible  to  the  naked  eye.  Which 
of  these  is  the  "real"  table?  We  are  natu- 
rally tempted  to  say  that  what  we  see 
through  the  microscope  is  more  real,  but 
Lliat  in  turn  would  be  changed  by  a  still 
more  powerful  microscope.  If,  then,  we 
cannot  trust  what  we  see  with  the  naked 
eye,  why  should  we  trust  what  we  see 
through  a  microscope  ?     Thus,    again,    the 


APPEARANCE   AND   REALITY     15 

confidence  in  our  senses  with   which  we  be- 
gan deserts  us. 

The  sha'pe  of  the  table  is  no  better.  We 
are  all  in  the  habit  of  judging  as  to  the 
"  real  "  shapes  of  things,  and  we  do  this  so 
unreflectingly  that  we  come  to  think  we 
actually  see  the  real  shapes.  But,  in  fact, 
as  we  all  have  to  learn  if  we  try  to  draw,  a 
given  thing  looks  different  in  shape  from 
every  different  point  of  view.  If  our  table 
is  "  really  "  rectangular,  it  will  look,  from 
almost  all  points  of  view,  as  if  it  had  two 
acute  angles  and  two  obtuse  angles.  If 
opposite  sides  are  parallel,  they  will  look  as 
if  they  converged  to  a  point  away  from  the 
spectator  ;  if  they  are  of  equal  length,  they 
will  look  as  if  the  nearer  side  were  longer. 
All  these  things  are  not  commonly  noticed 
in  looking  at  a  table,  because  experience  has 
taught  us  to  construct  the  "  real "  shape  from 
the  apparent  shape,  and  the  "  real  "  shape 
is  what  interests  us  as  practical  men.  But 
the  "  real  "  shape  is  not  what  we  see  ;  it  is 
something  inferred  from  what  we  see.  And 
what  we  see  is  constantly  changing  in  shape 


16    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

as  we  move  about  the  room  ;  so  that  here 
again  the  senses  seem  not  to  give  us  the  truth 
about  the  table  itself,  but  only  about  the 
appearance  of  the  table. 

Similar  difficulties  arise  when  we  consider 
the  sense  of  touch.  It  is  true  that  the  table 
always  gives  us  a  sensation  of  hardness,  and 
we  feel  that  it  resists  pressure.  But  the 
sensation  we  obtain  depends  upon  how  hard 
we  press  the  table  and  also  upon  what  part 
of  the  body  we  press  with  ;  thus  the  various 
sensations  due  to  various  pressures  or  various 
parts  of  the  body  cannot  be  supposed  to 
reveal  directly  any  definite  property  of  the 
table,  but  at  most  to  be  sig7is  of  some 
property  which  perhaps  causes  all  the  sen- 
sations, but  is  not  actually  apparent  in  any 
of  them.  And  the  same  applies  still  more 
obviously  to  the  sounds  which  can  be  elicited 
by  rapping  the  table. 

Thus  it  becomes  evident  that  the  real  table, 
if  there  is  one,  is  not  the  same  as  what  we 
immediately  experience  by  sight  or  touch  or 
hearing.  The  real  table,  if  there  is  one,  is 
not  immediately  known  to  us  at  all,  but  must 


APPEARANCE  AND   REALITY    17 

be  an  inference  from  what  is  immediately 
known.  Hence,  two  very  difficult  questions 
at  once  arise  ;  namely,  (1)  Is  there  a  real  table 
&t  all  ?  (2)  If  so,  what  sort  of  object  can  it 
be? 

It  will  help  us  in  considering  these  questions 
to  have  a  few  simple  terms  of  which  the 
meaning  is  definite  and  clear.  Let  us  give 
the  name  of  "  sense-data  "  to  the  things  that 
are  immediately  known  in  sensation :  such 
things  as  colours,  sounds,  smells,  hardnesses, 
roughnesses,  and  so  on.  We  shall  give  the 
name  "  sensation "  to  the  experience  of 
being  immediately  aware  of  these  things. 
Thus,  whenever  we  see  a  colour,  we  have  a 
sensation  of  the  colour,  but  the  colour  itself 
is  a  sense-datum,  not  a  sensation.  The 
colour  is  that  of  which  we  are  immediately 
aware,  and  the  awareness  itself  is  the  sensation. 
It  is  plain  that  if  we  are  to  know  anything 
about  the  table,  it  must  be  by  means  of  the 
sense-data — brown  colour,  oblong  shape, 
smoothness,  etc. — which  we  associate  with 
the  table  ;  but  for  the  reasons  which  have 
been  given,  we  cannot  say  that  the  table  is  the 


18    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

sense-data,  or  even  that  the  sense-data  are 
directly  properties  of  the  table.  Thus  a 
problem  arises  as  to  the  relation  of  the  sense- 
data  to  the  real  table,  supposing  there  is 
such  a  thing. 

The  real  table,  if  it  exists,  we  will  call  a 
"  physical  object."  Thus  we  have  to  consider 
the  relation  of  sense-data  to  physical  objects. 
The  collection  of  all  physical  objects  is  called 
"  matter."  Thus  our  two  questions  may 
be  re-stated  as  follows  :  (1)  Is  there  any 
such  thing  as  matter  ?  (2)  If  so,  what  is  its 
nature  ? 

The  philosopher  who  first  brought  pro- 
minently forward  the  reasons  for  regarding 
the  immediate  objects  of  our  senses  as  not 
existing  independently  of  us  was  Bishop 
Berkeley  (1685-1753).  His  Three  Dialogues 
between  Hylas  and  Philonous,  in  Opposition 
to  Sceptics  and  Atheists,  undertake  to  prove 
that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  matter  at  all, 
and  that  the  world  consists  of  nothing  but 
minds  and  their  ideas.  Hylas  has  hitherto 
believed  in  matter,  but  he  is  no  match  for 
Philonous,  who  mercilessly  drives  him  into 


APPEARANCE  AND  REALITY    19 

contradictions  and  paradoxes,  and  makes 
his  own  denial  of  matter  seem,  in  the  end, 
as  if  it  were  almost  common  sense.  The 
arguments  employed  are  of  very  different 
value :  some  are  important  and  sound, 
others  are  confused  or  quibbling.  But 
Berkeley  retains  the  merit  of  having  shown 
that  the  existence  of  matter  is  capable  of 
being  denied  without  absurdity,  and  that  if 
there  are  any  things  that  exist  independently 
of  us  they  cannot  be  the  immediate  objects 
of  our  sensations. 

There  are  two  different  questions  involved 
when  we  ask  whether  matter  exists,  and  it  is 
important  to  keep  them  clear.  We  commonly 
mean  by  "  matter "  something  which  is 
opposed  to  "  mind,"  something  which  we 
think  of  as  occupying  space  and  as  radically 
incapable  of  any  sort  of  thought  or  conscious- 
ness. It  is  chiefly  in  this  sense  that  Berkeley 
denies  matter  ;  that  is  to  say,  he  does  not 
deny  that  the  sense-data  which  we  commonly 
take  as  signs  of  the  existence  of  the  table  are 
really  signs  of  the  existence  of  something  inde- 
pendent of  us,  but  he  does  deny  that  this  some^ 


20    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

thing  is  non-mental,  that  it  is  neither  mind 
nor  ideas  entertained  by  some  mind.  He 
admits  that  there  must  be  something  which 
continues  to  exist  when  we  go  out  of  the  room 
or  shut  our  eyes,  and  that  what  we  call 
seeing  the  table  does  really  give  us  reason 
for  believing  in  something  which  persists 
even  when  we  are  not  seeing  it.  But  he 
thinks  that  this  something  cannot  be  radi- 
cally different  in  nature  from  what  we  see,  and 
cannot  be  independent  of  seeing  altogether, 
though  it  must  be  independent  of  our  seeing. 
He  is  thus  led  to  regard  the  "  real  "  table  as 
an  idea  in  the  mind  of  God.  Such  an  idea 
has  the  required  permanence  and  independence 
of  ourselves,  without  being — as  matter  would 
otherwise  be — something  quite  unknowable, 
in  the  sense  that  we  can  only  infer  it,  and 
can  never  be  directly  and  immediately  aware 
of  it. 

Other  philosophers  since  Berkeley  have 
also  held  that,  although  the  table  does  not 
depend  for  its  existence  upon  being  seen  by 
me,  it  does  depend  upon  being  seen  (or 
otherwise  apprehended  in  sensation)  by  some 


APPEARANCE   AND   REALITY    21 

mind — not  necessarily  the  mind  of  God, 
but  more  often  the  whole  collective  mind  of 
the  universe.  This  they  hold,  as  Berkeley 
does,  chiefly  because  they  think  there  can 
be  nothing  real — or  at  any  rate  nothing 
known  to  be  real — except  minds  and  their 
thoughts  and  feelings.  We  might  state  the 
argument  by  which  they  support  their  view 
in  some  such  way  as  this :  "  Whatever 
can  be  thought  of  is  an  idea  in  the 
mind  of  the  person  thinking  of  it ;  therefore 
nothing  can  be  thought  of  except  ideas  in 
minds ;  therefore  anything  else  is  incon- 
ceivable, and  what  is  inconceivable  cannot 
exist." 

Such  an  argument,  in  my  opinion,  is 
fallacious  ;  and  of  course  those  who  advance 
it  do  not  put  it  so  shortly  or  so  crudely.  But 
whether  valid  or  not,  the  argument  has  been 
very  widely  advanced  in  one  form  or  another ; 
and  very  many  philosophers,  perhaps  a 
majority,  have  held  that  there  is  nothing  real 
except  minds  and  their  ideas.  Such  philo- 
sophers are  called  "  idealists."  When  they 
come  to  explaining  matter,  they  either  say, 


22    THE   PROBLEMS   OF  PHILOSOPHY 

like  Berkeley,  that  matter  is  really  nothing 
but  a  collection  of  ideas,  or  they  say,  like 
Leibniz  (1646-1716),  that  what  appears  as 
matter  is  really  a  collection  of  more  or  less 
rudimentary  minds. 

But  these  philosophers,  though  they  deny 
matter  as  opposed  to  mind,  nevertheless,  in 
another  sense,  admit  matter.  It  will  be 
remembered  that  we  asked  two  questions  ; 
namely,  (1)  Is  there  a  real  table  at  all  ?  (2)  If 
so,  what  sort  of  object  can  it  be  ?  Now 
both  Berkeley  and  Leibniz  admit  that  there 
is  a  real  table,  but  Berkeley  says  it  is  certain 
ideas  in  the  mind  of  God,  and  Leibniz  says 
it  is  a  colony  of  souls.  Thus  both  of  them 
answer  our  first  question  in  the  affirmative, 
and  only  diverge  from  the  views  of  ordi- 
nary mortals  in  their  answer  to  our  second 
question.  In  fact,  almost  all  philosophers 
seem  to  be  agreed  that  there  is  a  real  table  : 
they  almost  all  agree  that,  however  much 
our  sense-data — colour,  shape,  smoothness, 
etc. — may  depend  upon  us,  yet  their  oc- 
currence is  a  sign  of  something  existing 
independently    of    us,    something    differing, 


APPEARANCE   AND   REALITY    23 

perhaps,  completely  from  our  sense-data, 
and  yet  to  be  regarded  as  causing  those 
sense-data  whenever  we  are  in  a  suitable 
relation  to  the  real  table. 

Now  obviously  this  point  in  which  the 
philosophers  are  agreed — the  view  that  there 
is  a  real  table,  whatever  its  nature  may  be 
— is  vitally  important,  and  it  will  be  worth 
while  to  consider  what  reasons  there  are  for 
accepting  this  view  before  we  go  on  to  the 
further  question  as  to  the  nature  of  the  real 
table.  Our  next  chapter,  therefore,  will  be 
concerned  with  the  reasons  for  supposing 
that  there  is  a  real  table  at  all. 

Before  we  go  farther  it  will  be  well  to 
consider  for  a  moment  what  it  is  that  we 
have  discovered  so  far.  It  has  appeared 
that,  if  we  take  any  common  object  of  the 
sort  that  is  supposed  to  be  known  by  the 
senses,  what  the  senses  immediately  tell  us 
is  not  the  truth  about  the  object  as  it  is 
apart  from  us,  but  only  the  truth  about 
certain  sense-data  which,  so  far  as  we  can 
see,  depend  upon  the  relations  between  us 
and  the  object.     Thus  what  we  directly  see 


24    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

and  feel  is  merely  "  appearance,"  which  we 
believe  to  be  a  sign  of  some  "  reality " 
behind.  But  if  the  reality  is  not  what 
appears,  have  we  any  means  of  knowing 
whether  there  is  any  reality  at  all  ?  And  if 
so,  have  we  any  means  of  finding  out  what 
it  is  like  ? 

Such  questions  are  bewildering,  and  it  is 
difficult  to  know  that  even  the  strangest 
hypotheses  may  not  be  true.  Thus  our 
familiar  table,  which  has  roused  but  the 
slightest  thoughts  in  us  hitherto,  has  become 
a  problem  full  of  surprising  possibilities. 
The  one  thing  we  know  about  it  is  that  it 
is  not  what  it  seems.  Beyond  this  modest 
result,  so  far,  we  have  the  most  complete 
liberty  of  conjecture.  Leibniz  tells  us  it 
is  a  community  of  souls  ;  Berkeley  tells  us 
it  is  an  idea  in  the  mind  of  God  ;  sober 
science,  scarcely  less  wonderful,  tells  us  it 
is  a  vast  collection  of  electric  charges  in 
violent  motion. 

Among  these  surprising  possibilities,  doubt 
suggests  that  perhaps  there  is  no  table  at  all. 
Philosophy,    if   it   cannot   answer   so   many 


APPEARANCE   AND   REALITY      25 

questions  as  we  could  wish,  has  at  least  the 
power  of  asking  questions  which  increase 
the  interest  of  the  world,  and  show  the 
strangeness  and  wonder  lying  just  below  the 
surface  even  in  the  commonest  things  of 
daily  life. 


CHAPTER    II 

THE   EXISTENCE   OF   MATTER 

In  this  chapter  we  have  to  ask  ourselves 
whether,  in  any  sense  at  all,  there  is  such  a 
thing  as  matter.  Is  there  a  table  which 
has  a  certain  intrinsic  nature,  and  continues 
to  exist  when  I  am  not  looking,  or  is  the  table 
merely  a  product  of  my  imagination,  a  dream- 
table  in  a  very  prolonged  dream  ?  This 
question  is  of  the  greatest  importance.  For 
if  we  cannot  be  sure  of  the  independent 
existence  of  objects,  we  cannot  be  sure  of 
the  independent  existence  of  other  people's 
bodies,  and  therefore  still  less  of  other  people's 
minds,  since  we  have  no  grounds  for  be- 
lieving in  their  minds  except  such  as  are 
derived  from  observing  their  bodies.  Thus 
if  we  cannot  be  sure  of  the  independent 
existence  of  objects,  we  shall  be  left  alone 

36 


THE   EXISTENCE   OF  MATTER      27 

in  a  desert — it  may  be  that  the  whole 
outer  world  is  nothing  but  a  dream,  and 
that  we  alone  exist.  This  is  an  uncomfort- 
able possibility  ;  but  although  it  cannot  be 
strictly  proved  to  be  false,  there  is  not  the 
slightest  reason  to  suppose  that  it  is  true. 
In  this  chapter  we  have  to  see  why  this  is 
the  case. 

Before  we  embark  upon  doubtful  matters, 
let  us  try  to  find  some  more  or  less  fixed  point 
from  which  to  start.  Although  we  are 
doubting  the  physical  existence  of  the  table, 
we  are  not  doubting  the  existence  of  the 
sense-data  which  made  us  think  there  was  a 
table  ;  we  are  not  doubting  that,  while  we 
look,  a  certain  colour  and  shape  appear  to 
us,  and  while  we  press,  a  certain  sensation  of 
hardness  is  experienced  by  us.  All  this, 
which  is  psychological,  we  are  not  calling  in 
question.  In  fact,  whatever  else  may  be 
doubtful,  some  at  least  of  our  immediate 
experiences  seem  absolutely  certain. 

Descartes  (1596-1650),  the  founder  of 
modern  philosophy,  invented  a  method  which 
may  still  be  used  with  profit — the  method  of 


28    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

systematic  doubt.  He  determined  that  he 
would  believe  nothing  which  he  did  not  see 
quite  clearly  and  distinctly  to  be  true.  What- 
ever he  could  bring  himself  to  doubt,  he  would 
doubt,  until  he  saw  reason  for  not  doubting 
it.  By  applying  this  method  he  gradually 
became  convinced  that  the  only  existence  of 
which  he  could  be  quite  certain  was  his  own. 
He  imagined  a  deceitful  demon,  who  pre- 
sented unreal  things  to  his  senses  in  a 
perpetual  phantasmagoria ;  it  might  be  very 
improbable  that  such  a  demon  existed,  but 
still  it  was  possible,  and  therefore  doubt 
concerning  things  perceived  by  the  senses 
was  possible. 

But  doubt  concerning  his  own  existence 
was  not  possible,  for  if  he  did  not  exist,  no 
demon  could  deceive  him.  If  he  doubted, 
he  must  exist ;  if  he  had  any  experiences 
whatever,  he  must  exist.  Thus  his  own  ex- 
istence was  an  absolute  certainty  to  him. 
"  I  think,  therefore  I  am,"  he  said  {Cogiio, 
ergo  sum) ;  and  on  the  basis  of  this  certainty 
he  set  to  work  to  build  up  again  the  world 
of  knowledge  which  his  doubt  had  laid  in 


THE  EXISTENCE  OF  MATTER      29 

ruins.  By  inventing  the  method  of  doubt, 
and  by  showing  that  subjective  things  are 
the  most  certain,  Descartes  performed  a 
great  service  to  philosophy,  and  one  which 
makes  him  still  useful  to  all  students  of 
the  subject. 

But  some  care  is  needed  in  using  Des- 
cartes' argument.  "  /  think,  therefore  / 
am "  says  rather  more  than  is  strictly  cer- 
tain. It  might  seem  as  though  we  were 
quite  sure  of  being  the  same  person  to-day 
as  we  were  yesterday,  and  this  is  no  doubt 
true  in  some  sense.  But  the  real  Self  is 
as  hard  to  arrive  at  as  the  real  table,  and 
does  not  seem  to  have  that  absolute,  con- 
vincing certainty  that  belongs  to  particular 
experiences.  When  I  look  at  my  table  and 
see  a  certain  brown  colour,  what  is  quite  cer- 
tain at  once  is  not  "  /  am  seeing  a  brown 
colour,"  but  rather,  "  a  brown  colour  is  being 
seen."  This  of  course  involves  something 
(or  somebody)  which  (or  who)  sees  the  brown 
colour ;  but  it  does  not  of  itself  involve  that 
more  or  less  permanent  person  whom  we  call 
"  I.'-     So  far  as  immediate  certainty  goes. 


30    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

it  might  be  that  the  something  which 
sees  the  brown  colour  is  quite  momentary, 
and  not  the  same  as  the  something  which 
has  some  different  experience  the  next 
moment. 

Thus  it  is  our  particular  thoughts  and 
feelings  that  have  primitive  certainty.  And 
this  applies  to  dreams  and  hallucinations  as 
well  as  to  normal  perceptions :  when  we 
dream  or  see  a  ghost,  we  certainly  do  have 
the  sensations  we  think  we  have,  but  for 
various  reasons  it  is  held  that  no  physical 
object  corresponds  to  these  sensations.  Thus 
the  certainty  of  our  knowledge  of  our  own 
experiences  does  not  have  to  be  limited  in 
any  way  to  allow  for  exceptional  cases.  Here, 
therefore,  we  have,  for  what  it  is  worth,  a 
solid  basis  from  which  to  begin  our  pursuit 
of  knowledge. 

The  problem  we  have  to  consider  is  this  : 
Granted  that  we  are  certain  of  our  own  sense- 
data,  have  we  any  reason  for  regarding  them 
as  signs  of  the  existence  of  something  else, 
which  we  can  call  the  physical  object?  When 
we  have  enumerated  all  the  sense-data  which 


THE  EXISTENCE   OF  MATTER    81 

we  should  naturally  regard  as  connected  with 
the  table,  have  we  said  all  there  is  to  say 
about  the  table,  or  is  there  still  something 
else — something  not  a  sense-datum,  some- 
thing which  persists  when  we  go  out  of  the 
room?  Common  sense  unhesitatingly  answers 
that  there  is.  What  can  be  bought  and  sold 
and  pushed  about  and  have  a  cloth  laid  on  it, 
and  so  on,  cannot  be  a  mere  collection  of  sense- 
data.  If  the  cloth  completely  hides  the 
table,  we  shall  derive  no  sense-data  from 
the  table,  and  therefore,  if  the  table  were 
merely  sense-data,  it  would  have  ceased  to 
exist,  and  the  cloth  would  be  suspended  in 
empty  air,  resting,  by  a  miracle,  in  the  place 
where  the  table  formerly  was.  This  seems 
plainly  absurd  ;  but  whoever  wishes  to  be- 
come a  philosopher  must  learn  not  to  be 
frightened  by  absurdities. 

One  great  reason  why  it  is  felt  that  we  must 
secure  a  physical  object  in  addition  to  the 
sense-data,  is  that  we  want  the  same  object 
for  different  people.  When  ten  people  are 
sitting  round  a  dinner-table,  it  seems  pre- 
posterous   to    maintain   that    they    are    not 


32    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

seeing  the  same  tablecloth,  the  same  knives 
and  forks  and  spoons  and  glasses.  But  the 
sense-data  are  private  to  each  separate  person ; 
what  is  immediately  present  to  the  sight 
of  one  is  not  immediately  present  to  the 
sight  of  another  :  they  all  see  things  from 
slightly  different  points  of  view,  and  therefore 
see  them  slightly  differently.  Thus,  if  there 
are  to  be  public  neutral  objects,  which  can  be 
in  some  sense  known  to  many  different  people, 
there  must  be  something  over  and  above  the 
private  and  particular  sense-data  which  ap- 
pear to  various  people.  What  reason,  then, 
have  we  for  believing  that  there  are  such 
public  neutral  objects  ? 

The  first  answer  that  naturally  occurs  to 
one  is  that,  although  different  people  may 
see  the  table  slightly  differently,  still  they  all 
see  more  or  less  similar  things  when  they 
look  at  the  table,  and  the  variations  in  what 
they  see  follow  the  laws  of  perspective  and 
reflection  of  light,  so  that  it  is  easy  to  arrive 
at  a  permanent  object  underlying  all  the  dif- 
ferent people's  sense-data.  I  bought  my  table 
from  the  former  occupant  of  my  room  ;    I 


THE   EXISTENCE   OF  MATTER    33 

could  not  buy  his  sense-data,  which  died 
when  he  went  away,  but  I  could  and  did  buy 
the  confident  expectation  of  more  or  less 
similar  sense-data.  Thus  it  is  the  fact  that 
different  people  have  similar  sense-data,  and 
that  one  person  in  a  given  place  at  different 
times  has  similar  sense-data,  which  makes 
us  suppose  that  over  and  above  the  sense- 
data  there  is  a  permanent  public  object  which 
underlies  or  causes  the  sense-data  of  various 
people  and  various  times. 

Now  in  so  far  as  the  above  considerations 
depend  upon  supposing  that  there  are  other 
people  besides  ourselves,  they  beg  the  very 
question  at  issue.  Other  people  are  repre- 
sented to  me  by  certain  sense-data,  such  as 
the  sight  of  them  or  the  sound  of  their  voices, 
and  if  I  had  no  reason  to  believe  that  there 
were  physical  objects  independent  of  my 
sense-data,  I  should  have  no  reason  to  believe 
that  other  people  exist  except  as  part  of  my 
dream.  Thus,  when  we  are  trying  to  show  that 
there  must  be  objects  independent  of  our  own 
sense-data,  we  cannot  appeal  to  the  testimony 
of  other  people,  since  this  testimony  itself 

B 


34    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

consists  of  sense-data,  and  does  not  reveal 
other  people's  experiences  unless  our  own 
sense-data  are  signs  of  things  existing  inde- 
oendently  of  us.  We  must  therefore,  if 
possible,  find,  in  our  own  purely  private 
experiences,  characteristics  which  show,  or 
tend  to  show,  that  there  are  in  the  world 
things  other  than  ourselves  and  our  private 
experiences. 

In  one  sense  it  must  be  admitted  that  we 
can  never  prove  the  existence  of  things  other 
than  ourselves  and  our  experiences.  No 
logical  absurdity  results  from  the  hypothesis 
that  the  world  consists  of  myself  and  my 
thoughts  and  feelings  and  sensations,  and 
that  everything  else  is  mere  fancy.  In 
dreams  a  very  complicated  world  may  seem 
to  be  present,  and  yet  on  waking  we  find  it 
was  a  delusion  ;  that  is  to  say,  we  find  that 
the  sense-data  in  the  dream  do  not  appear  to 
have  corresponded  with  such  physical  objects 
as  we  should  naturally  infer  from  our  sense- 
data.  (It  is  true  that,  when  the  physical 
world  is  assumed,  it  is  possible  to  find  physical 
causes  for  the  sense-data  in  dreams  :    a  door 


THE  EXISTENCE  OF  MATTER    35 

banging,  for  instance,  may  cause  us  to  dream 
of  a  naval  engagement.  But  although,  in 
this  case,  there  is  a  physical  cause  for  the 
sense-data,  there  is  not  a  physical  object 
corresponding  to  the  sense-data  in  the  way  in 
which  an  actual  naval  battle  would  corre- 
spond.) There  is  no  logical  impossibility  in 
the  supposition  that  the  whole  of  life  is  a 
dream,  in  which  we  ourselves  create  all  the 
objects  that  come  before  us.  But  although 
this  is  not  logically  impossible,  there  is  no 
reason  whatever  to  suppose  that  it  is  true ; 
and  it  is,  in  fact,  a  less  simple  hypothesis, 
viewed  as  a  means  of  accounting  for  the 
facts  of  our  own  life,  than  the  common-sense 
hypothesis  that  there  really  are  objects  inde- 
pendent of  us,  whose  action  on  us  causes  our 
sensations. 

The  way  in  which  simplicity  comes  in  from 
supposing  that  there  really  are  physical 
objects  is  easily  seen.  If  the  cat  appears  at 
one  moment  in  one  part  of  the  room,  and  at 
another  in  another  part,  it  is  natural  to 
suppose  that  it  has  moved  from  the  one  to 
the  other,  passing  over  a  series  of  intermediate 


36    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

positions.  But  if  it  is  merely  a  set  of  sense- 
data,  it  cannot  have  ever  been  in  any  place 
where  I  did  not  see  it ;  thus  we  shall  have 
to  suppose  that  it  did  not  exist  at  all  while 
I  was  not  looking,  but  suddenly  sprang  into 
being  in  a  new  place.  If  the  cat  exists 
whether  I  see  it  or  not,  we  can  understand 
from  our  own  experience  how  it  gets  hungry 
between  one  meal  and  the  next ;  but  if  it 
does  not  exist  when  I  am  not  seeing  it,  it 
seems  odd  that  appetite  should  grow  during 
non-existence  as  fast  as  during  existence. 
And  if  the  cat  consists  only  of  sense-data,  it 
cannot  be  hungry,  since  no  hunger  but  my 
own  can  be  a  sense-datum  to  me.  Thus 
the  behaviour  of  the  sense-data  which  repre- 
sent the  cat  to  me,  though  it  seems  quite 
natural  when  regarded  as  an  expression  of 
hunger,  becomes  utterly  inexplicable  when 
regarded  as  mere  movements  and  changes 
of  patches  of  colour,  which  are  as  incapable 
of  hunger  as  a  triangle  is  of  playing  foot- 
ball. 

But  the  difficulty  in  the  case  of  the  cat  is 
nothing  compared  to  the  difTiculty  in  the  case 


THE   EXISTENCE   OF  MATTER    37 

of  human  beings.  When  human  beings  speak 
— that  is,  when  we  hear  certain  noises  which 
we  associate  with  ideas,  and  simultaneously 
see  certain  motions  of  lips  and  expressions  of 
face — it  is  very  difficult  to  suppose  that  what 
we  hear  is  not  the  expression  of  a  thought, 
as  we  know  it  would  be  if  we  emitted  the 
same  sounds.  Of  course  similar  things  happen 
in  dreams,  where  we  are  mistaken  as  to  the 
existence  of  other  people.  But  dreams  are 
more  or  less  suggested  by  what  we  call  waking 
life,  and  are  capable  of  being  more  or  less 
accounted  for  on  scientific  principles  if  we 
assume  that  there  really  is  a  physical 
world.  Thus  every  principle  of  simplicity 
urges  us  to  adopt  the  natural  view,  that 
there  really  are  objects  other  than  our 
selves  and  our  sense-data  which  have  an 
existence  not  dependent  upon  our  perceiving 
them. 

Of  course  it  is  not  by  argument  that  we 
originally  come  by  our  belief  in  an  independent 
external  world.  We  find  this  belief  ready 
in  ourselves  as  soon  as  we  begin  to  reflect : 
it  is  what  may  be  called  an  instinctive  belief 


38    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

We  should  never  have  been  led  to  question 
this  belief  but  for  the  fact  that,  at  any  rate 
in  the  case  of  sight,  it  seems  as  if  the  sense- 
datum  itself  were  instinctively  believed  to 
be  the  independent  object,  whereas  argument 
shows  that  the  object  cannot  be  identical 
with  the  sense-datum.  This  discovery,  how- 
ever— which  is  not  at  all  paradoxical  in  the 
case  of  taste  and  smell  and  sound,  and  only 
slightly  so  in  the  case  of  touch — leaves  un- 
diminished our  instinctive  belief  that  there 
are  objects  corresponding  to  our  sense-data. 
Since  this  belief  does  not  lead  to  any  diffi- 
culties, but  on  the  contrary  tends  to  simplify 
and  systematise  our  account  of  our  experi- 
ences, there  seems  no  good  reason  for  rejecting 
it.  We  may  therefore  admit — though  with 
a  slight  doubt  derived  from  dreams — that 
the  external  world  does  really  exist,  and  is  not 
wholly  dependent  for  its  existence  upon  our 
continuing  to  perceive  it. 

The  argument  which  has  led  us  to  this  con- 
clusion is  doubtless  less  strong  than  we  could 
wish,  but  it  is  typical  of  many  philosophical 
arguments,  and  it  is  therefore  worth  while  to 


THE   EXISTENCE   OF   MATTER    39 

consider  briefly  its  general  character  and 
validity.  All  knowledge,  we  find,  must  be 
built  up  upon  our  instinctive  beliefs,  and  if 
these  are  rejected,  nothing  is  left.  But  among 
our  instinctive  beliefs  some  are  much  stronger 
than  others,  while  many  have,  by  habit  and 
association,  become  entangled  with  other 
beliefs,  not  really  instinctive,  but  falsely 
supposed  to  be  part  of  what  is  believed 
instinctively. 

Philosophy  should  show  us  the  hierarchy 
of  our  instinctive  beliefs,  beginning  with 
those  we  hold  most  strongly,  and  presenting 
each  as  much  isolated  and  as  free  from  irrele- 
vant additions  as  possible.  It  should  take 
care  to  show  that,  in  the  form  in  which  they 
are  finally  set  forth,  our  instinctive  beliefs 
do  not  clash,  but  form  a  harmonious  system. 
There  can  never  be  any  reason  for  rejecting 
one  instinctive  belief  except  that  it  clashes 
with  others  ;  thus,  if  they  are  found  to  har- 
monise, the  whole  system  becomes  worthy  of 
acceptance. 

It  is  of  course  possible  that  all  or  any  of  our 
beliefs  may  be  mistaken,  and  therefore  all 


40    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

ought  to  be  held  with  at  least  some  slight 
element  of  doubt.  But  we  cannot  have 
reason  to  reject  a  belief  except  on  the 
ground  of  some  other  belief.  Hence,  by 
organising  our  instinctive  beliefs  and  their 
consequences,  by  considering  which  among 
them  it  is  most  possible,  if  necessary,  to 
modify  or  abandon,  we  can  arrive,  on 
the  basis  of  accepting  as  our  sole  data 
what  we  instinctively  believe,  at  an  or- 
derly systematic  organisation  of  our  know- 
ledge, in  which,  though  the  possibility  of 
error  remains,  its  likelihood  is  diminished 
by  the  interrelation  of  the  parts  and  by 
the  critical  scrutiny  which  has  preceded 
acquiescence. 

This  function,  at  least,  philosophy  can  per- 
form. Most  philosophers,  rightly  or  wrongly, 
believe  that  philosophy  can  do  much  more 
than  this — that  it  can  give  us  knowledge, 
not  otherwise  attainable,  concerning  the 
universe  as  a  whole,  and  concerning  the  nature 
of  ultimate  reality.  Whether  this  be  the 
case  or  not,  the  more  modest  function  we  have 
spoken   of   can    certainly    be   performed    by 


THE  EXISTENCE  OF  MATTER      41 

philosophy,  and  certainly  suffices,  for  those 
who  have  once  begun  to  doubt  the  adequacy 
of  common  sense,  to  justify  the  arduous  and 
difficult  labours  that  philosophical  problems 
involve. 


CHAPTER    III 

THE   NATURE   OF   MATTER 

In  the  preceding  chapter  we  agreed, 
though  without  being  able  to  find  demonstra- 
tive reasons,  that  it  is  rational  to  believe  that 
our  sense-data — for  example,  those  which  we 
regard  as  associated  with  my  table — are 
really  signs  of  the  existence  of  something 
independent  of  us  and  our  perceptions.  That 
is  to  say,  over  and  above  the  sensations  of 
colour,  hardness,  noise,  and  so  on,  which 
make  up  the  appearance  of  the  table  to 
me,  I  assume  that  there  is  something  else, 
of  which  these  things  are  appearances. 
The  colour  ceases  to  exist  if  I  shut  my 
eyes,  the  sensation  of  hardness  ceases  to 
exist  if  I  remove  my  arm  from  contact 
with  the  table,  the  sound  ceases  to  exist  if 
I  cease  to  rap  the  table  with  my  knuckles. 

42 


THE  NATURE   OF  MATTER        43 

But  I  do  not  believe  that  when  all  these 
things  cease  the  table  ceases.  On  the 
contrary,  I  believe  that  it  is  because  the 
table  exists  continuously  that  all  these 
sense-data  will  reappear  when  I  open  my 
eyes,  replace  my  arm,  and  begin  again 
to  rap  with  my  knuckles.  The  question 
we  have  to  consider  in  this  chapter  is : 
What  is  the  nature  of  this  real  table, 
which  persists  independently  of  my  per- 
ception of  it  ? 

To  this  question  physical  science  gives  an 
answer,  somewhat  incomplete  it  is  true,  and  in 
part  still  very  hypothetical,  but  yet  deserving 
of  respect  so  far  as  it  goes.  Physical  science, 
more  or  less  unconsciously,  has  drifted  into 
the  view  that  all  natural  phenomena  ought  to 
be  reduced  to  motions.  Light  and  heat  and 
sound  are  all  due  to  wave-motions,  which 
travel  from  the  body  emitting  them  to  the 
person  who  sees  light  or  feels  heat  or  hears 
sound.  That  which  has  the  wave-motion  is 
either  cether  or  "  gross  matter,"  but  in  either 
case  is  what  the  philosopher  would  call  matter. 
The  only  properties  which  science  assigns  to 


44    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

I  it  are  position  in  space,  and  the  povyer  of 
1  motion  according  to  the  laws  of  motion. 
Science  does  not  deny  that  it  may  have  other 
properties  ;  but  if  so,  such  other  properties 
are  not  useful  to  the  man  of  science,  and  in 
no  way  assist  him  in  explaining  the  pheno- 
mena. 

It  is  sometimes  said  that  "  light  is  a  form 
of  wave-motion,"  but  this  is  misleading,  for 
the  light  which  we  immediately  see,  which 
we  know  directly  by  means  of  our  senses, 
is  not  a  form  of  wave-motion,  but  some- 
thing quite  different  —  something  which 
we  all  know  if  we  are  not  blind,  though 
we  cannot  describe  it  so  as  to  convey  our 
knowledge  to  a  man  who  is  blind.  A  wave- 
motion,  on  the  contrary,  could  quite  well 
be  described  to  a  blind  man,  since  he 
can  acquire  a  knowledge  of  space  by 
the  sense  of  touch  ;  and  he  can  experience 
a  wave-motion  by  a  sea  voyage  almost 
as  well  as  we  can.  But  this,  which  a 
blind  man  can  understand,  is  not  what  we 
mean  by  light:  we  mean  by  light  just  that 
which  a  blind  man  can   never   understand, 


THE  NATURE   OF   MATTER       45 

and  which  we  can  never  describe  to 
him. 

Now  this  something,  which  all  of  us  who  are 
not  blind  know,  is  not,  according  to  science, 
really  to  be  found  in  the  outer  world  :  it  is 
something  caused  by  the  action  of  certain 
waves  upon  the  eyes  and  nerves  and  brain  of 
the  person  who  sees  the  light.  When  it  is 
said  that  light  is  waves,  what  is  really 
meant  is  that  waves  are  the  physical  cause 
of  our  sensations  of  light.  But  light  itself, 
the  thing  which  seeing  people  experience 
and  blind  people  do  not,  is  not  supposed  by 
science  to  form  any  part  of  the  world  that 
is  independent  of  us  and  our  senses.  And 
very  similar  remarks  would  apply  to  other 
kinds  of  sensations. 

It  is  not  only  colours  and  sounds  and  so 
on  that  are  absent  from  the  scientific  world 
of  matter,  but  also  space  as  we  get  it  through 
sight  or  touch.  It  is  essential  to  science  that 
its  matter  should  be  in  a  space,  but  the 
space  in  which  it  is  cannot  be  exactly  the 
space  we  see  or  feel.  To  begin  v/ith,  space 
as  we  see  it  is  not  the  same  as  space  as  we 


46    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

get  it  by  the  sense  of  touch  ;  it  is  only  by 
experience  in  infancy  that  we  learn  how  to 
touch  things  we  see,  or  how  to  get  a  sight 
of  things  which  we  feel  touching  us.  But 
the  space  of  science  is  neutral  as  be- 
tween touch  and  sight ;  thus  it  cannot  be 
either  the  space  of  touch  or  the  space  of 
sight. 

Again,  different  people  see  the  same  object 
as  of  different  shapes,  according  to  their 
point  of  view.  A  circular  coin,  for  example, 
though  we  should  always  judge  it  to  be 
circular,  will  look  oval  unless  we  are 
straight  in  front  of  it.  When  we  judge  that 
it  is  circular,  we  are  judging  that  it  has  a 
real  shape  which  is  not  its  apparent  shape, 
but  belongs  to  it  intrinsically  apart  from 
its  appearance.  But  this  real  shape,  which 
is  what  concerns  science,  must  be  in  a  real 
space,  not  the  same  as  anybody's  apparent 
space.  The  real  space  is  public,  the  apparent 
space  is  private  to  the  percipient.  In  differ- 
ent people's  private  spaces  the  same  object 
seems  to  have  different  shapes  ;  thus  the  real 
space,  in  which  it  has  its  real  shape,  must  be 


THE  NATURE   OF  MATTER       47 

different  from  the  private  spaces.     The  space  ' 
of  science,  therefore,  though  connected  with 
the  spaces  we  see  and  feel,  is  not  identical 
with  them,  and  the  manner  of  its  connection, 
requires  investigation.  ' 

We  agreed  provisionally  that  physical 
objects  cannot  be  quite  like  our  sense-data, 
but  may  be  regarded  as  causing  our  sen- 
sations. These  physical  objects  are  in  the 
space  of  science,  which  we  may  call  "  physi- 
cal "  space.  It  is  important  to  notice  that, 
if  our  sensations  are  to  be  caused  by  phy- 
sical objects,  there  must  be  a  physical  space 
containing  these  objects  and  our  sense- 
organs  and  nerves  and  brain.  We  get  a 
sensation  of  touch  from  an  object  when 
we  are  in  contact  with  it ;  that  is  to  say, 
when  some  part  of  our  body  occupies  a  place 
in  physical  space  quite  close  to  the  space 
occupied  by  the  object.  We  see  an  object 
(roughly  speaking)  when  no  opaque  body 
is  between  the  object  and  our  eyes  in  phy- 
sical space.  Similarly,  we  only  hear  or  smell 
or  taste  an  object  when  we  are  sufficiently 
near  to  it,  or  when  it  touches  the  tongue. 


48    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

or  has  some  suitable  position  in  physical 
space  relatively  to  our  body.  We  cannot 
begin  to  state  what  different  sensations 
we  shall  derive  from  a  given  object  under 
different  circumstances  unless  we  regard  the 
object  and  our  body  as  both  in  one  physical 
space,  for  it  is  mainly  the  relative  positions 
of  the  object  and  our  body  that  determine 
what  sensations  we  shall  derive  from  the 
object. 

Now  our  sense-data  are  situated  in  our 
private  spaces,  either  the  space  of  sight  or 
the  space  of  touch  or  such  vaguer  spaces 
as  other  senses  may  give  us.  If,  as  science 
and  common  sense  assume,  there  is  one 
public  all-embracing  physical  space  in  which 
physical  objects  are,  the  relative  positions  of 
physical  objects  in  physical  space  must  more 
or  less  correspond  to  the  relative  positions  of 
sense-data  in  our  private  spaces.  There  is 
no  difficulty  in  supposing  this  to  be  the  case. 
If  we  see  on  a  road  one  house  nearer  to  us 
than  another,  our  other  senses  will  bear 
out  the  view  that  it  is  nearer ;  for  example, 
it  will  be  reached  sooner  if  we  walk  along 


THE   NATURE   OF  MATTER       49 

the  road.  Other  people  will  agree  that  the 
house  which  looks  nearer  to  us  is  nearer ; 
the  ordnance  map  will  take  the  same  view ; 
and  thus  everything  points  to  a  spatial 
relation  between  the  houses  corresponding 
to  the  relation  between  the  sense-data  which 
we  see  when  we  look  at  the  houses.  Thus  we 
may  assume  that  there  is  a  physical  space 
in  which  physical  objects  have  spatial  re- 
lations corresponding  to  those  which  the 
corresponding  sense-data  have  in  our  private 
spaces.  It  is  this  physical  space  which  is 
dealt  with  in  geometry  and  assumed  in 
physics  and  astronomy. 

Assuming  that  there  is  physical  space, 
and  that  it  does  thus  correspond  to  private 
spaces,  what  can  we  know  about  it  ?  We 
can  know  only  what  is  required  in  order  to 
secure  the  correspondence.  That  is  to  say, 
we  can  know  nothing  of  what  it  is  like  in  itself, 
but  we  can  know  the  sort  of  arrangement 
of  physical  objects  which  results  from  their 
spatial  relations.  We  can  know,  for  example, 
that  the  earth  and  moon  and  sun  are  in 
one  straight  line  during  an  eclipse,  though 


50    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

we  cannot  know  what  a  physical  straight 
line  is  in  itself,  as  we  know  the  look  of  a 
straight  line  in  our  visual  space.  Thus  we 
come  to  know  much  more  about  the  re- 
lations of  distances  in  physical  space  than 
about  the  distances  themselves;  we  may 
know  that  one  distance  is  greater  than 
another,  or  that  it  is  along  the  same  straight 
line  as  the  other,  but  we  cannot  have  that 
immediate  acquaintance  with  physical  dis- 
tances that  we  have  with  distances  in  our 
private  spaces,  or  with  colours  or  sounds 
or  other  sense-data.  We  can  know  all  those 
things  about  physical  space  which  a  man 
born  blind  might  know  through  other  people 
about  the  space  of  sight ;  but  the  kind  of 
things  which  a  man  born  blind  could  never 
know  about  the  space  of  sight  we  also  cannot 
know  about  physical  space.  We  can  know 
the  properties  of  the  relations  required  to 
preserve  the  correspondence  with  sense-data, 
but  we  cannot  know  the  nature  of  the  terms 
between  which  the  relations  hold. 

With  regard  to  time,  our  feeling  of  dura- 
tion or  of  the  lapse  of  time  is  notoriously  an 


THE  NATURE   OF   MATTER       51 

unsafe  guide  as  to  the  time  that  has  elapsed 
by  the  clock.  Times  when  we  are  bored  or 
suffering  pain  pass  slowly,  times  when  we 
are  agreeably  occupied  pass  quickly,  and 
times  when  we  are  sleeping  pass  almost  as 
if  they  did  not  exist.  Thus,  in  so  far  as  time 
is  constituted  by  duration,  there  is  the  same 
necessity  for  distinguishing  a  public  and  a 
private  time  as  there  was  in  the  case  of 
space.  But  in  so  far  as  time  consists  in 
an  order  of  before  and  after,  there  is  no  need 
to  make  such  a  distinction  ;  the  time-order 
which  events  seem  to  have  is,  so  far  as  we 
can  see,  the  same  as  the  time-order  which 
they  do  have.  At  any  rate  no  reason  can 
be  given  for  supposing  that  the  two  orders  are 
not  the  same.  The  same  is  usually  true  of 
space  :  if  a  regiment  of  men  are  marching 
along  a  road,  the  shape  of  the  regiment  will 
look  different  from  different  points  of  view, 
but  the  men  will  appear  arranged  in  the 
same  order  from  all  points  of  view.  Hence 
we  regard  the  order  as  true  also  in  physical 
space,  whereas  the  shape  is  only  supposed 
to  correspond  to  the  physical  space  so  far 


52    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

as  is   required   for   the  preservation   of  the 
order. 

In  saying  that  the  time-order  which  events 
seem  to  have  is  the  same  as  the  time-orier 
which  they  really  have,  it  is  necessary  to 
guard  against  a  possible  misunderstanding. 
It  must  not  be  supposed  that  the  various 
states  of  different  physical  objects  have 
the  same  time-order  as  the  sense-data  which 
constitute  the  perceptions  of  those  objects. 
Considered  as  physical  objects,  the  thunder 
and  lightning  are  simultaneous ;  that  is 
to  say,  the  lightning  is  simultaneous  with 
the  disturbance  of  the  air  in  the  place 
where  the  disturbance  begins,  namely,  where 
the  lightning  is.  But  the  sense-datum 
which  we  call  hearing  the  thunder  does  not 
take  place  until  the  disturbance  of  the  air 
has  travelled  as  far  as  to  where  we  are. 
Similarly,  it  takes  about  eight  minutes  for 
the  sun's  light  to  reach  us  ;  thus,  when  we 
see  the  sun  we  are  seeing  the  sun  of  eight 
minutes  ago.  So  far  as  our  sense-data 
afford  evidence  as  to  the  physical  sun  they 
afford   evidence   as   to  the   physical   sun   of 


THE   NATURE  OF  MATTER       53 

eight  minutes  ago  ;  if  the  physical  sun  had 
ceased  to  exist  within  the  last  eight  minutes, 
that  would  make  no  difference  to  the  sense- 
data  which  we  call  "  seeing  the  sun." 
This  affords  a  fresh  illustration  of  the  neces- 
sity of  distinguishing  between  sense-data 
and  physical  objects. 

What  we  have  found  as  regards  space  is 
much  the  same  as  what  we  find  in  relation 
to  the  correspondence  of  the  sense-data  with 
their  physical  counterparts.  If  one  object 
looks  blue  and  another  red,  we  may  reason- 
ably presume  that  there  is  some  corresponding 
difference  between  the  physical  objects  ;  if 
two  objects  both  look  blue,  we  may  presume 
a  corresponding  similarity.  But  we  cannot 
hope  to  be  acquainted  directly  with  the 
quality  in  the  physical  object  which  makes 
it  look  blue  or  red.  Science  tells  us  that 
this  quality  is  a  certain  sort  of  wave- 
motion,  and  this  sounds  familiar,  because 
we  think  of  wave-motions  in  the  space  we 
see.  But  the  wave-motions  must  really 
be  in  physical  space,  with  which  we  have 
no     direct     acquaintance ;     thus     the     real 


54     THE  PROBLEMS   OF  PHILOSOPHY 

wave  -  motions  have  not  that  f  amiharity 
which  we  might  have  supposed  them  to 
have.  And  what  holds  for  colours  is  closely 
similar  to  what  holds  for  other  sense-data. 
Thus  we  find  that,  although  the  relations 
of  physical  objects  have  all  sorts  of  know- 
able  properties,  derived  from  their  corre- 
spondence with  the  relations  of  sense-data, 
the  physical  objects  themselves  remain  un- 
known in  their  intrinsic  nature,  so  far  at  least 
as  can  be  discovered  by  means  of  the  senses. 
The  question  remains  whether  there  is  any 
other  method  of  discovering  the  intrinsic 
nature  of  physical  objects. 

The  most  natural,  though  not  ultimately 
the  most  defensible,  hypothesis  to  adopt  in  the 
first  instance,  at  any  rate  as  regards  visual 
sense-data,  would  be  that,  though  physical 
objects  cannot,  for  the  reasons  we  have  been 
considering,  be  exactly  like  sense-data,  yet 
they  may  be  more  or  less  like.  According  to 
this  view,  physical  objects  will,  for  example, 
really  have  colours,  and  we  might,  by  good 
luck,  see  an  object  as  of  the  colour  it  really 
is.     The   colour   which   an   object   seems   to 


THE   NATURE   OF   MATTER        55 

have  at  any  given  moment  will  in  general 
be  very  similar,  though  not  quite  the  same, 
from  many  different  points  of  view  ;  we  might 
thus  suppose  the  "  real  "  colour  to  be  a  sort 
of  medium  colour,  intermediate  between 
the  various  shades  which  appear  from  the 
different  points  of  view. 

Such  a  theory  is  perhaps  not  capable  of 
being  definitely  refuted,  but  it  can  be  shown 
to  be  groundless.  To  begin  with,  it  is  plain 
that  the  colour  we  see  depends  only  upon  the 
nature  of  the  light-waves  that  strike  the  eye, 
and  is  therefore  modified  by  the  medium 
intervening  between  us  and  the  object,  as 
well  as  by  the  manner  in  which  light  is  re- 
flected from  the  object  in  the  direction  of 
the  eye.  The  intervening  air  alters  colours 
unless  it  is  perfectly  clear,  and  any  strong 
reflection  will  alter  them  completely.  Thus 
the  colour  we  see  is  a  result  of  the  ray  as  it 
reaches  the  eye,  and  not  simply  a  property 
of  the  object  from  which  the  ray  comes. 
Hence,  also,  provided  certain  waves  reach 
the  eye,  we  shall  see  a  certain  colour,  whether 
the  object  from  which  the  waves  start  has 


56    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

any  colour  or  not.  Thus  it  is  quite  gra- 
tuitous to  suppose  that  physical  objects 
have  colours,  and  therefore  there  is  no 
justification  for  making  such  a  supposition. 
Exactly  similar  arguments  will  apply  to 
other  sense-data. 

It  remains  to  ask  whether  there  are  any 
general  philosophical  arguments  enabling  us 
to  say  that,  if  matter  is  real,  it  must  be  of 
such  and  such  a  nature.     As  explained  above, 

,  very  many  philosophers,  perhaps  most,  have 
held  that  whatever  is  real  must  be  in  some 
sense  mental,  or  at  any  rate  that  whatever 
we  can  know  anything  about  must  be  in  some 

'  sense  mental.  Such  philosophers  are  called 
*'  idealists."  Idealists  tell  us  that  what  ap- 
pears as  matter  is  really  something  mental ; 
namely,  either  (as  Leibniz  held)  more  or  less 
rudimentary  minds,  or  (as  Berkeley  contended) 
ideas  in  the  minds  which,  as  we  should  com- 
monly say,  "  perceive  "  the  matter.  Thus 
idealists  deny  the  existence  of  matter  as 
something  intrinsically  different  from  mind, 
though  they  do  not  deny  that  our  sense-data 
are  signs  of   something   which  exists  inde- 


THE   NATURE  OF  MATTER         57 

pendently  of  our  private  sensations.  In  the 
following  chapter  we  shall  consider  briefly 
the  reasons — in  my  opinion  fallacious — 
which  idealists  advance  in  favour  of  their 
theory. 


CHAPTER    IV 

IDEALISM 

The  word  "  idealism  "  is  used  by  different 
philosophers  in  somewhat  different  senses,. 
We  shall  understand  by  it  the  doctrine  thai; 
whatever  exists,  or  at  any  rate  whatever  can. 
be  known  to  exist,  must  be  in  some  senses 
mental.  This  doctrine,  which  is  very  widely 
held  among  philosophers,  has  several  forms,. 
and  is  advocated  on  several  different  grounds. 
The  doctrine  is  so  widely  held,  and  so  in" 
teresting  in  itself,  that  even  the  briefest 
survey  of  philosophy  must  give  some  ac- 
count of  it. 

Those  who  are  unaccustomed  to  philo- 
sophical speculation  may  be  inclined  to 
dismiss  such  a  doctrine  as  obviously  absurd. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  common  sense  regards 
tables  and  chairs  and  the  sun  and  moon  and 

68 


IDEALISM  59 

material  objects  generally  as  something  radic- 
ally different  from  minds  and  the  contents  of 
minds,  and  as  having  an  existence  which 
might  continue  if  minds  ceased.  We  think 
of  matter  as  having  existed  long  before  there 
were  any  minds,  and  it  is  hard  to  think  of  it 
as  a  mere  product  of  mental  activity.  But 
whether  true  or  false,  idealism  is  not  to  be 
dismissed  as  obviously  absurd. 

We  have  seen  that,  even  if  physical  objects  ) 
do  have  an  independent  existence,  they  must 
differ  very  widely  from  sense-data,  and  can 
only  have  a  correspondence  with  sense-data, 
in  the  same  sort  of  way  in  which  a  catalogue 
has  a  correspondence  with  the  things  cata- 
logued. Hence  common  sense  leaves  us 
completely  in  the  dark  as  to  the  true  intrinsic 
nature  of  physical  objects,  and  if  there  were 
good  reason  to  regard  them  as  mental,  we 
could  not  legitimately  reject  this  opinion 
merely  because  it  strikes  us  as  strange.  The  \ 
truth  about  physical  objects  must  be  strange. 
It  may  be  unattainable,  but  if  any  philosopher 
believes  that  he  has  attained  it,  the  fact  that 
what  he  offers  as  the  truth  is  strange  ought 


60    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

not  to  be  made  a  ground  of  objection  to  his 
opinion. 

The  grounds  on  which  ideahsm  is  advocated 
are  generally  grounds  derived  from  the  theory 
of  knowledge,  that  is  to  say,  from  a  discussion 
of  the  conditions  which  things  must  satisfy 
in  order  that  we  may  be  able  to  know  them. 
The  first  serious  attempt  to  establish  idealism 
on  such  grounds  was  that  of  Bishop  Berkeley. 
He  proved  first,  by  arguments  which  were 
largely  valid,  that  our  sense-data  cannot  be 
supposed  to  have  an  existence  independent 
of  us,  but  must  be,  in  part  at  least,  "  in  " 
the  mind,  in  the  sense  that  their  existence 
would  not  continue  if  there  were  no  seeing 
or  hearing  or  touching  or  smelling  or  tasting. 
So  far,  his  contention  was  almost  certainly 
valid,  even  if  some  of  his  arguments  were  not 
so.  But  he  went  on  to  argue  that  sense-data 
were  the  only  things  of  whose  existence  our 
perceptions  could  assure  us,  and  that  to  be 
known  is  to  be  "  in  "  a  mind,  and  therefore 
to  be  mental.  Hence  he  concluded  that 
nothing  can  ever  be  known  except  what  is  in 
some   mind,    and   that   whatever   is   known 


IDEALISM  61 

without  being  in  my  mind  must  be  in  some 
other  mind. 

In  order  to  understand  his  argument,  it  is 
necessary  to  understand  his  use  of  the  word 
"  idea."     He  gives  the  name  "  idea  "  to  any-  \ 
thing   which   is   immediately   known,  as,  for  i 
example,  sense-data  are  known.     Thus  a  par-  1 
ticular  colour  which  we  see  is  an  idea  ;  so  is 
a  voice  which  we  hear,  and  so  on.     But  the 
term  is  not  wholly  confined  to  sense-data. 
There    will    also    be    things    remembered   or 
imagined,  for  with  such  things  also  we  have 
immediate  acquaintance  at  the  moment  of 
remembering    or    imagining.     All    such    im- 
mediate data  he  calls  "  ideas." 

He  then  proceeds  to  consider  common 
objects,  such  as  a  tree,  for  instance.  He  shows 
that  all  we  know  immediately  when  we  "  per- 
ceive "  the  tree  consists  of  ideas  in  his  sense 
of  the  word,  and  he  argues  that  there  is  not 
the  slightest  ground  for  supposing  that  there 
is  anything  real  about  the  tree  except  what  is 
perceived.  Its  being,  he  says,  consists  in 
being  perceived  :  in  the  Latin  of  the  school- 
men its  "  esse  "  is  "  percipi.^'     He  fully  admits 


62     THE  PROBLEMS   OF  PHILOSOPHY 

that  the  tree  must  continue  to  exist  even  when 
we  shut  our  eyes  or  when  no  human  being  is 
near  it.  But  this  continued  existence,  he 
says,  is  due  to  the  fact  that  God  continues  to 
perceive  it ;  the  "  real  "  tree,  which  corre- 
sponds to  what  we  called  the  physical  object, 
consists  of  ideas  in  the  mind  of  God,  ideas 
more  or  less  like  those  we  have  when  we  see 
the  tree,  but  differing  in  the  fact  that  they  are 
permanent  in  God's  mind  so  long  as  the  tree 
continues  to  exist.  All  our  perceptions, 
according  to  him,  consist  in  a  partial  parti- 
cipation in  God's  perceptions,  and  it  is 
because  of  this  participation  that  different 
people  see  more  or  less  the  same  tree.  Thus 
apart  from  minds  and  their  ideas  there  is 
nothing  in  the  world,  nor  is  it  possible  that 
anything  else  should  ever  be  known,  since 
whatever  is  known  is  necessarily  an  idea. 

There  are  in  this  argument  a  good  many 
fallacies  which  have  been  important  in  the 
history  of  philosophy,  and  which  it  will  be 
as  well  to  bring  to  light.  In  the  first  place, 
there  is  a  confusion  engendered  by  the  use 
of  the  word  "  idea."     We  think  of  an  idea 


IDEALISM  63 

as  essentially  something  in  somebody's  mind, 
and  thus  when  we  are  told  that  a  tree  consists 
entirely  of  ideas,  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that, 
if  so,  the  tree  must  be  entirely  in  minds.  But 
the  notion  of  being  "  in  "  the  mind  is  am- 
biguous. We  speak  of  bearing  a  person  in 
mind,  not  meaning  that  the  person  is  in  our 
minds,  but  that  a  thought  of  him  is  in  our 
minds.  When  a  man  says  that  some  business 
he  had  to  arrange  went  clean  out  of  his  mind, 
he  does  not  mean  to  imply  that  the  business 
itself  was  ever  in  his  mind,  but  only  that  a 
thought  of  the  business  was  formerly  in  his 
mind,  but  afterwards  ceased  to  be  in  his 
mind.  And  so  when  Berkeley  says  that  the 
tree  must  be  in  our  minds  if  we  can  know  it, 
all  that  he  really  has  a  right  to  say  is  that  a 
thought  of  the  tree  must  be  in  our  minds.  To 
argue  that  the  tree  itself  must  be  in  our  minds 
is  like  arguing  that  a  person  whom  we  bear 
in  mind  is  himself  in  our  minds.  This  con- 
fusion may  seem  too  gross  to  have  been  really 
committed  by  any  competent  philosopher, 
but  various  attendant  circumstances  rendered 
it   possible.     In   order   to    see   how   it   was 


64    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

possible,  we  must  go  more  deeply  into  the 
question  as  to  the  nature  of  ideas. 

Before  taking  up  the  general  question  of 
the  nature  of  ideas,  we  must  disentangle  two 
entirely  separate  questions  which  arise  con- 
cerning sense-data  and  physical  objects.  We 
saw  that,  for  various  reasons  of  detail, 
Berkeley  was  right  in  treating  the  sense-data 
which  constitute  our  perception  of  the  tree 
as  more  or  less  subjective,  in  the  sense  that 
they  depend  upon  us  as  much  as  upon  the 
tree,  and  would  not  exist  if  the  tree  were  not 
being  perceived.  But  this  is  an  entirely 
different  point  from  the  one  by  which 
Berkeley  seeks  to  prove  that  whatever  can  be 
immediately  known  must  be  in  a  mind.  For 
this  purpose  arguments  of  detail  as  to  the  de- 
pendence of  sense-data  upon  us  are  useless. 
It  is  necessary  to  prove,  generally,  that  by 
being  known,  things  are  shown  to  be  mental. 
This  is  what  Berkeley  believes  himself  to 
have  done.  It  is  this  question,  and  not  our 
previous  question  as  to  the  difference  between 
sense-data  and  the  physical  object,  that  must 
now  concern  us. 


IDEALISM  65 

Taking  the  word  "  idea "  in  Berkeley's 
sense,  there  are  two  quite  distinct  things  to 
be  considered  whenever  an  idea  is  before  the 
mind.  There  is  on  the  one  hand  the  thing 
of  which  we  are  av/are — say  the  colour  of 
my  table — and  on  the  other  hand  the  actual 
awareness  itself,  the  mental  act  of  appre- 
hending the  thing.  The  mental  act  is  un- 
doubtedly mental,  but  is  there  any  reason 
to  suppose  that  the  thing  apprehended  is 
in  any  sense  mental  ?  Our  previous  argu- 
ments concerning  the  colour  did  not  prove 
it  to  be  mental ;  they  only  proved  that  its 
existence  depends  upon  the  relation  of  our 
sense  organs  to  the  physical  object — in  our 
case,  the  table.  That  is  to  say,  they  proved 
that  a  certain  colour  will  exist,  in  a  certain 
light,  if  a  normal  eye  is  placed  at  a  certain 
point  relatively  to  the  table.  They  did  not 
prove  that  the  colour  is  in  the  mind  of  the 
percipient. 

Berkeley's  view,  that  obviously  the  colour 
must  be  in  the  mind,  seems  to  depend  for  its 
plausibility  upon  confusing  the  thing  appre- 
hended with  the  act  of  apprehension.  Either 
o 


66    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

of  these  might  be  called  an  "  idea  "  ;  probably 
either  would  have  been  called  an  idea  by 
Berkeley.  The  act  is  undoubtedly  in  the 
mind ;  hence,  when  we  are  thinking  of  the 
act,  we  readily  assent  to  the  view  that  ideas 
must  be  in  the  mind.  Then,  forgetting  that 
this  was  only  true  when  ideas  were  taken 
as  acts  of  apprehension,  we  transfer  the  pro- 
position that  "  ideas  are  in  the  mind  "  to 
ideas  in  the  other  sense,  i.e.  to  the  things 
apprehended  by  our  acts  of  apprehension. 
Thus,  by  an  unconscious  equivocation,  we 
arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  whatever  we 
can  apprehend  must  be  in  our  minds.  This 
seems  to  be  the  true  analysis  of  Berkeley's 
argument,  and  the  ultimate  fallacy  upon 
which  it  rests. 

This  question  of  the  distinction  between 
act  and  object  in  our  apprehending  of  things 
is  vitally  important,  since  our  whole  power 
of  acquiring  knowledge  is  bound  up  with  it. 
The  faculty  of  being  acquainted  with  things 
other  than  itself  is  the  main  characteristic 
of  a  mind.  Acquaintance  with  objects  essen- 
tially consists  in  a  relation  between  the  mind 


IDEALISM  67 

and  something  other  than  the  mind  ;  it  is 
this  that  constitutes  the  mind's  power  of 
knowing  things.  If  we  say  that  the  things 
known  must  be  in  the  mind,  we  are  either 
unduly  limiting  the  mind's  power  of  knowing, 
or  we  are  uttering  a  mere  tautology.  We 
are  uttering  a  mere  tautology  if  we  mean  by 
"  in  the  mind  "  the  same  as  by  "  before  the 
mind,"  i.e.  if  we  mean  merely  being  appre- 
hended by  the  mind.  But  if  we  mean  this, 
we  shall  have  to  admit  that  what,  in  this 
sense,  is  in  the  mind,  may  nevertheless  be  not 
mental.  Thus  when  we  realise  the  nature  of 
knowledge,  Berkeley's  argument  is  seen  to 
be  wrong  in  substance  as  well  as  in  form,  and 
his  grounds  for  supposing  that  "ideas" — i.e. 
the  objects  apprehended — must  be  mental, 
are  found  to  have  no  validity  whatever. 
Hence  his  grounds  in  favour  of  idealism  may 
be  dismissed.  It  remains  to  see  whether 
there  are  any  other  grounds. 

It  is  often  said,  as  though  it  were  a  self- 
evident  truism,  that  we  cannot  know  that 
anything  exists  which  we  do  not  know.  It 
is  inferred  that  whatever  can  in  any  way  be 


68    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

relevant  to  our  experience  must  be  at  least 
capable  of  being  known  by  us  ;  whence  it 
follows  that  if  matter  were  essentially  some- 
thing with  which  we  could  not  become  ac- 
quainted, matter  would  be  something  which 
we  could  not  know  to  exist,  and  which  could 
have  for  us  no  importance  whatever.  It  is 
generally  also  implied,  for  reasons  which 
remain  obscure,  that  what  can  have  no  im- 
portance for  us  cannot  be  real,  and  that 
therefore  matter,  if  it  is  not  composed  of 
minds  or  of  mental  ideas,  is  impossible  and  a 
mere  chimoera. 

To  go  into  this  argument  fully  at  our 
present  stage  would  be  impossible,  since  it 
raises  points  requiring  a  considerable  pre- 
liminary discussion  ;  but  certain  reasons  for 
rejecting  the  argument  may  be  noticed  at 
once.  To  begin  at  the  end :  there  is  no 
reason  why  what  cannot  have  any  practical 
importance  for  us  should  not  be  real.  It  is 
true  that,  if  theoretical  importance  is  included, 
everything  real  is  of  some  importance  to  us, 
since,  as  persons  desirous  of  knowing  the 
truth    about   the    universe,    we    have    some 


IDEALISM  69 

interest  in  everything  that  the  universe 
contains.  But  if  this  sort  of  interest  is 
included,  it  is  not  the  case  that  matter  has  no 
importance  for  us,  provided  it  exists,  even 
if  we  cannot  know  that  it  exists.  We  can, 
obviously,  suspect  that  it  may  exist,  and 
wonder  whether  it  does  ;  hence  it  is  con- 
nected with  our  desire  for  knowledge,  and 
has  the  importance  of  either  satisfying  or 
thwarting  this  desire. 

Again,  it  is  by  no  means  a  truism,  and 
is  in  fact  false,  that  we  cannot  know 
that  anything  exists  which  we  do  not  know. 
The  word  "  know  "  is  here  used  in  two  differ- 
ent senses.  (1)  In  its  first  use  it  is  applicable 
to  the  sort  of  knowledge  which  is  opposed  to 
error,  the  sense  in  which  what  we  know  is 
true,  the  sense  which  applies  to  our  beliefs 
and  convictions,  i.e.  to  what  are  called  judg- 
ments. In  this  sense  of  the  word  we  know 
that  something  is  the  case.  This  sort  of  know- 
ledge may  be  described  as  knowledge  of  truths. 
(2)  In  the  second  use  of  the  word  "  know  " 
above,  the  word  applies  to  our  knowledge  of 
things^  which  we  may  call  acquaintance.     This 


70    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

is  the  sense  in  which  we  know  sense-data. 
(The  distinction  involved  is  roughly  that 
between  savoir  and  connaitre  in  French,  or 
between  wissen  and  kennen  in  German.) 

Thus  the  statement  which  seemed  like  a 
truism  becomes,  when  re-stated,  the  following : 
"  We  can  never  truly  judge  that  something 
with  which  we  are  not  acquainted  exists." 
This  is  by  no  means  a  truism,  but  on  the 
contrary  a  palpable  falsehood,  I  have  not 
the  honour  to  be  acquainted  with  the  Emperor 
of  Russia,  but  I  truly  judge  that  he  exists. 
It  may  be  said,  of  course,  that  I  judge  this  be- 
cause of  other  people's  acquaintance  with  him. 
This,  however,  would  be  an  irrelevant  retort, 
since,  if  the  principle  were  true,  I  could  not 
know  that  any  one  else  i^  acquainted  with 
him.  But  further  :  there  is  no  reason  why  I 
should  not  know  of  the  existence  of  something 
with  which  nobody  is  acquainted.  This  point 
is  important,  and  demands  elucidation. 

If  I  am  acquainted  with  a  thing  which 
exists,  my  acquaintance  gives  me  the  know- 
ledge that  it  exists.  But  it  is  not  true  that, 
conversely,    whenever    I    can    know   that    a 


IDEALISM  71 

thing  of  a  certain  sort  exists,  I  or  some  one 
else  must  be  acquainted  with  the  thing. 
What  happens,  in  cases  where  I  have  true 
judgment  without  acquaintance,  is  that  the 
thing  is  known  to  me  by  description,  and  that, 
in  virtue  of  some  general  principle,  the 
existence  of  a  thing  answering  to  this  de- 
scription can  be  inferred  from  the  existence 
of  something  with  which  I  am  acquainted. 
In  order  to  understand  this  point  fully,  it 
will  be  well  first  to  deal  with  the  difference 
between  knowledge  by  acquaintance  and 
knowledge  by  description,  and  then  to  con- 
sider what  knowledge  of  general  principles, 
if  any,  has  the  same  kind  of  certainty  as  our 
knowledge  of  the  existence  of  our  own  ex- 
periences. These  subjects  will  be  dealt  with 
m  the  following  chapters. 


CHAPTER  V 

KNOWLEDGE    BY    ACQUAINTANCE    AND    KNOW- 
LEDGE BY  DESCRIPTION 

In  the  preceding  chapter  we  saw  that 
there  are  two  sorts  of  knowledge  :  knowledge 
of  things,  and  knowledge  of  truths.  In  this 
chapter  we  shall  be  concerned  exclusively 
with  knowledge  of  things,  of  which  in  turn  we 
shall  have  to  distinguish  two  kinds.  Know- 
ledge of  things,  when  it  is  of  the  kind  we 
call  knowledge  by  acquaintance,  is  essentially 
simpler  than  any  knowledge  of  truths,  and 
logically  independent  of  knowledge  of  truths, 
though  it  would  be  rash  to  assume  that  human 
beings  ever,  in  fact,  have  acquaintance  with 
things  without  at  the  same  time  knowing 
some  truth  about  them.  Knowledge  of  things 
by  description,  on  the  contrary,  always  in- 
volves, as  we  shall  find  in  the  course  of  the 

72 


ACQUAINTANCE  AND  DESCRIPTION  78 

present  chapter,  some  knowledge  of  truths  as 
its  source  and  ground.  But  first  of  all  we 
must  make  clear  what  we  mean  by  "  acquaint- 
ance "  and  what  we  mean  by  "  description." 
We  shall  say  that  w^e  have  acquaintance 
with  anything  of  which  we  are  directly  aware, 
without  the  intermediary  of  any  process  of 
inference  or  any  knowledge  of  truths.  Thus 
in  the  presence  of  my  table  I  am  acquainted 
with  the  sense-data  that  make  up  the  appear- 
ance of  my  table — its  colour,  shape,  hardness, 
smoothness,  etc.  ;  all  these  are  things  of 
which  I  am  immediately  conscious  when  I  am 
seeing  and  touching  my  table.  The  particular 
shade  of  colour  that  I  am  seeing  may  have 
many  things  said  about  it — I  may  say  that  it 
is  brown,  that  it  is  rather  dark,  and  so  on. 
But  such  statements,  though  they  make  me 
know  truths  about  the  colour,  do  not  make  me 
know  the  colour  itself  any  better  than  I  did 
before  :  so  far  as  concerns  knowledge  of  the 
colour  itself,  as  opposed  to  knowledge  of 
truths  about  it,  I  know  the  colour  perfectly 
and  completely  when  I  see  it,  and  no  further 
knowledge  of  it  itself   is  even  theoretically 


74    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

possible.  Thus  the  sense-data  which  make 
up  the  appearance  of  my  table  are  things 
with  which  I  have  acquaintance,  things  im- 
mediately known  to  me  just  as  they  are. 

My  knowledge  of  the  table  as  a  physical 
object,  on  the  contrary,  is  not  direct  know- 
ledge. Such  as  it  is,  it  is  obtained  through 
acquaintance  with  the  sense-data  that  make 
up  the  appearance  of  the  table.  We  have 
seen  that  it  is  possible,  without  absurdity,  to 
doubt  whether  there  is  a  table  at  all,  whereas 
it  is  not  possible  to  doubt  the  sense-data.  My 
knowledge  of  the  table  is  of  the  kind  which  we 
shall  call  "  knowledge  by  description."  The 
table  is  "  the  physical  object  which  causes 
such-and-such  sense-data."  This  describes 
the  table  by  means  of  the  sense-data.  In 
order  to  know  anything  at  all  about  the 
table,  we  must  know  truths  connecting  it 
with  things  with  which  we  have  acquaint- 
ance :  we  must  know  that  "  such-and-such 
sense-data  are  caused  by  a  physical  object." 
There  is  no  state  of  mind  in  which  we  are 
directly  aware  of  the  table  ;  all  our  know- 
ledge  of   the   table   is   really   knowledge   of 


ACQUAINTANCE  AND  DESCRIPTION  75 

truths,  and  the  actual  thing  which  is  the 
table  is  not,  strictly  speaking,  known  to  us 
at  all.  We  know  a  description,  and  we  know 
that  there  is  just  one  object  to  which  this 
description  applies,  though  the  object  itself 
is  not  directly  known  to  us.  In  such  a  case, 
we  say  that  our  knowledge  of  the  object  is 
knowledge  by  description. 

All  our  knowledge,  both  knowledge  of, 
things  and  knowledge  of  truths,  rests  upon 
acquaintance  as  its  foundation.  It  is  there- 
fore important  to  consider  what  kinds  of 
things  there  are  with  which  we  have  acquaint- 
ance. 

Sense-data,  as  we  have  already  seen,  are 
among  the  things  with  which  we  are  ac- 
quainted ;  in  fact,  they  supply  the  most 
obvious  and  striking  example  of  knowledge 
by  acquaintance.  But  if  they  were  the  sole 
example,  our  knowledge  would  be  very  much 
more  restricted  than  it  is.  We  should  only 
know  what  is  now  present  to  our  senses  :  we 
could  not  know  anything  about  the  past — not 
even  that  there  was  a  past — nor  could  we 
know  any  truths  about  our  sense-data,  for  all 


76    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

knowledge  of  truths,  as  we  shall  show,  de- 
mands acquaintance  with  things  which  are  of 
an  essentially  different  character  from  sense- 
data,  the  things  which  are  sometimes  called 
"  abstract  ideas,"  but  which  we  shall  call 
"  universals."  We  have  therefore  to  con- 
i|ider  acquaintance  with  other  things  besides 
sense-data  if  we  are  to  obtain  any  tolerably 
adequate  analysis  of  our  knowledge. 

The  first  extension  beyond  sense-data  to 
be  considered  is  acquaintance  by  memory. 
It  is  obvious  that  we  often  remember  what 
we  have  seen  or  heard  or  had  otherwise 
present  to  our  senses,  and  that  in  such  cases 
we  are  still  immediately  aware  of  what  we 
remember,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  it  appears 
as  past  and  not  as  present.  This  immediate 
knowledge  by  memory  is  the  source  of  all 
our  knowledge  concerning  the  past :  without 
it,  there  could  be  no  knowledge  of  the  past  by 
inference,  since  we  should  never  know  that 
there  was  anything  past  to  be  inferred. 

The  next  extension  to  be  considered  is 
acquaintance  by  introspection.  We  are  not 
only  aware  of  things,  but  we  are  often  aware 


ACQUAINTANCE  AND  DESCRIPTION  77 

of  being  aware  of  them.  When  I  see  the  sun, 
I  am  often  aware  of  my  seeing  the  sun  ;  thus 
"  my  seeing  the  sun  ''  is  an  object  with  which 
I  have  acquaintance.  When  I  desire  food,  I 
may  be  aware  of  my  desire  for  food  ;  thus 
*'  my  desiring  food  "  is  an  object  with  which 
I  am  acquainted.  Similarly  we  may  be 
aware  of  our  feeling  pleasure  or  pain,  and 
generally  of  the  events  which  happen  in  our 
minds.  This  kind  of  acquaintance,  which 
may  be  called  self-consciousness,  is  the  source 
of  all  our  knowledge  of  mental  things.  It  is 
obvious  that  it  is  only  what  goes  on  in  our 
own  minds  that  can  be  thus  known  imme- 
diately. What  goes  on  in  the  minds  of  others 
is  known  to  us  through  our  perception  of  their 
bodies,  that  is,  through  the  sense-data  in  us 
which  are  associated  with  their  bodies.  But 
for  our  acquaintance  with  the  contents  of  our 
own  minds,  we  should  be  unable  to  imagine 
the  minds  of  others,  and  therefore  we  could 
never  arrive  at  the  knowledge  that  they  have 
minds.  It  seems  natural  to  suppose  that 
self-consciousness  is  one  of  the  things  that 
distinguish  men  from  animals :    animals,  we 


78    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

may  suppose,  though  they  have  acquaintance 
with  sense-data,  never  become  aware  of  this 
acquaintance,  and  thus  never  know  of  their 
own  existence.  I  do  not  mean  that  they 
doubt  whether  they  exist,  but  that  they  have 
never  become  conscious  of  the  fact  that  they 
have  sensations  and  feehngs,  nor  therefore  of 
the  fact  that  they,  the  subjects  of  their 
sensations  and  feehngs,  exist. 

We  have  spoken  of  acquaintance  with  the 
contents  of  our  minds  as  seZ/-consciousness, 
but  it  is  not,  of  course,  consciousness  of  our 
self :  it  is  consciousness  of  particular 
thoughts  and  feehngs.  The  question  whether 
we  are  also  acquainted  with  oui  bare  selves, 
as  opposed  to  particular  thoughts  and  feelings, 
is  a  very  difficult  one,  upon  which  it  would 
be  rash  to  speak  positively.  When  we  try  to 
look  into  ourselves  we  always  seem  to  come 
upon  some  particular  thought  or  feeling,  and 
not  upon  the  "  I  "  which  has  the  thought  or 
feeling.  Nevertheless  there  are  some  reasons 
for  thinking  that  we  are  acquainted  with  the 
"  I,"  though  the  acquaintance  is  hard  to 
disentangle  from  other  things.     To  make  clear 


1 

ACQUAINTANCE  AND  DESCRIPTION  79 

what  sort  of  reason  there  is,  let  us  consider  for 
a  moment  what  our  acquaintance  with  par- 
ticular thoughts  really  involves. 

When  I  am  acquainted  with  *'  my  seeing 
the  sun,"  it  seems  plain  that  I  am  acquainted 
with  two  different  things  in  relation  to  each 
other.  On  the  one  hand  there  is  the  sense- 
datum  which  represents  the  sun  to  me,  on  the 
other  hand  there  is  that  which  sees  this 
sense-datum.  All  acquaintance,  such  as  my 
acquaintance  with  the  sense-datum  which 
represents  the  sun,  seems  obviously  a  relation 
between  the  person  acquainted  and  the  object 
with  which  the  person  is  acquainted.  When 
a  case  of  acquaintance  is  one  with  which  I 
can  be  acquainted  (as  I  am  acquainted  with 
my  acquaintance  with  the  sense-datum  re- 
presenting the  sun),  it  is  plain  that  the  person 
acquainted  is  myself.  Thus,  when  I  am 
acquainted  with  my  seeing  the  sun,  the  whole 
fact  with  which  I  am  acquainted  is  "  Self- 
acquainted-with-sense-datum." 

Further,  we  know  the  truth  "  I  am  ac- 
quainted with  this  sense-datum."  It  is  hard 
to   see   how  we  could   know  this   truth,   or 


80    THE  PROr.LE^lS  OF  PPIIL030PIIY 

even  understand  what  is  meant  by  it,  unless 
we  were  acquainted  with  something  which  we 
call  "  I."  It  docs  not  seem  necessary  to 
suppose  that  we  are  acquainted  with  a  more 
or  less  permanent  person,  the  same  to-day  as 
yesterday,  but  it  does  seem  as  though  we 
must  be  acquainted  with  that  thing,  whatever 
its  nature,  which  sees  the  sun  and  has  ac- 
quaintance with  sense-data.  Thus,  in  some 
sense  it  would  seem  we  must  be  acquainted 
with  our  Selves  as  opposed  to  our  particular 
experiences.  But  the  question  is  difficult, 
and  complicated  arguments  can  be  adduced 
on  either  side.  Hence,  although  acquaintance 
with  ourselves  seems  probably  to  occur,  it  is 
not  wise  to  assert  that  it  undoubtedly  does 
occur. 

We  may  therefore  sum  up  as  follov/s  what 
has  been  said  concerning  acquaintance  with 
things  that  exist.  We  have  acquaintance  in 
sensation  with  the  data  of  the  outer  senses, 
and  in  introspection  with  the  data  of  what 
may  be  called  the  inner  sense — thoughts, 
feelings,  desires,  etc.  ;  we  have  acquaintance 
in  memory  with  things  which  have  been  data 


ACQUAINTANCE  AND  DESCRIPTION  81 

either  of  the  outer  senses  or  of  the  inner  sense. 
Further,  it  is  probable,  though  not  certain,  that 
we  have  acquaintance  with  Self,  as  that  which 
is  aware  of  things  or  has  desires  towards  things. 

In  addition  to  our  acquaintance  with  parti- 
cular existing  things,  we  also  have  acquaint- 
ance with  what  we  shall  call  universals,  that 
is  to  say,  general  ideas,  such  as  whiteness, 
diversity,  brotherhood,  and  so  on.  Every  com- 
plete sentence  must  contain  at  least  one  word 
which  stands  for  a  universal,  since  all  verbs 
have  a  meaning  which  is  universal.  We  shall 
return  to  universals  later  on,  in  Chapter  IX  ; 
for  the  present,  it  is  only  necessary  to  guard 
against  the  supposition  that  whatever  we  can 
be  acquainted  with  must  be  something  parti- 
cular and  existent.  Awareness  of  universals 
is  called  conceiving,  and  a  universal  of  which 
we  are  aware  is  called  a  concept. 

It  will  be  seen  that  among  the  objects  with 
which  we  are  acquainted  are  not  included 
physical  objects  (as  opposed  to  sense-data), 
nor  other  people's  minds.  These  things  are 
known  to  us  by  what  I  call  "  knowledge  by 
description,"  which  we  must  now  consider. 


82    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

By  a  "  description  "  I  mean  any  phrase  of 
the  form  "  a  so-and-so  "  or  "the  so-and-so." 
A  phrase  of  the  form  "  a  so-and-so  "  I  shall 
call  an  "  ambiguous  "  description  ;  a  phrase 
of  the  form  "  the  so-and-so  "  (in  the  singular) 
I  shall  call  a  "  definite  "  description.  Thus 
"  a  man  "  is  an  ambiguous  description,  and 
"  the  man  with  the  iron  mask  "  is  a  definite 
description.  There  are  various  problems  con- 
nected with  ambiguous  descriptions,  but  I 
pass  them  by,  since  they  do  not  directly  con- 
cern the  matter  we  are  discussing,  which  is  the 
nature  of  our  knowledge  concerning  objects 
in  cases  where  we  know  that  there  is  an  object 
answering  to  a  definite  description,  though 
we  are  not  acquainted  with  any  such  object. 
This  is  a  matter  which  is  concerned  exclusively 
with  definite  descriptions.  I  shall  therefore,  in 
the  sequel,  speak  simply  of  "  descriptions  " 
when  I  mean  "  definite  descriptions."  Thus 
a  description  will  mean  any  phrase  of  the 
form  "  the  so-and-so  "  in  the  singular. 

We  shall  say  that  an  object  is  "  known  by 
description  "  when  we  know  that  it  is  "  the 
so-and-so,"  i.e.  when  we  know  that  there  is 


ACQUAINTANCE  AND  DESCRIPTION  88 

one  object,  and  no  more,  having  a  certain 
property  ;  and  it  will  generally  be  implied 
that  we  do  not  have  knowledge  of  the  same 
object  by  acquaintance.  We  know  that  the 
man  with  the  iron  mask  existed,  and  many 
propositions  are  known  about  him  ;  but  we  do 
not  know  who  he  was.  We  know  that  the 
candidate  who  gets  the  most  votes  v/ill  be 
elected,  and  in  this  case  we  are  very  likely  also 
acquainted  (in  the  only  sense  in  which  one 
can  be  acquainted  with  some  one  else)  with 
the  man  who  is,  in  fact,  the  candidate  who  will 
get  most  votes ;  but  we  do  not  know  which  of 
the  candidates  he  is,  i.e.  we  do  not  know  any 
proposition  of  the  form  "  A  is  the  candidate 
who  will  get  most  votes  "  where  A  is  one  of 
the  candidates  by  name.  We  shall  say  that 
we  have  "  merely  descriptive  knowledge  "  of 
the  so-and-so  when,  although  we  know^  that 
the  so-and-so  exists,  and  although  we  may 
possibly  be  acquainted  with  the  object  which 
is,  in  fact,  the  so-and-so,  yet  we  do  not  know 
any  proposition  "  a  is  the  so-and-so,"  where 
a  is  something  with  which  we  are  acquainted. 
When  we  say    "  the  so-and-so  exists,"  we 


84    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

mean  that  there  is  just  one  object  which  is  the 
so-and-so.  The  proposition  "  a  is  the  so-and- 
so  "  means  that  a  has  the  property  so-and-so, 
and  nothing  else  has.  "  Mr.  A.  is  the  Unionist 
candidate  for  this  constituency "  means 
"  Mr.  A.  is  a  Unionist  candidate  for  this 
constituency,  and  no  one  else  is."  "The 
Unionist  candidate  for  this  constituency 
exists"  means  "  some  one  is  a  Unionist  candi- 
date for  this  constituency,  and  no  one  else  is." 
Thus,  when  we  are  acquainted  with  an  object 
which  is  the  so-and-so,  we  know  that  the 
so-and-so  exists  ;  but  we  may  know  that  the 
so-and-so  exists  when  we  are  not  acquainted 
with  any  object  which  we  know  to  be  the  so- 
and-so,  and  even  when  we  are  not  acquainted 
with  any  object  which,  in  fact,  is  the  so-and-so. 
Common  words,  even  proper  names,  are 
usually  really  descriptions.  That  is  to  say, 
the  thought  in  the  mind  of  a  person  using  a 
proper  name  correctly  can  generally  only  be 
expressed  explicitly  if  we  replace  the  proper 
name  by  a  description.  Moreover,  the  de- 
scription required  to  express  the  thought  will 
vary  for  different  people,   or  for  the  same 


ACQUAINTANCE  AND  DESCRIPTION  85 

person  at  different  times.  The  only  thing 
constant  (so  long  as  the  name  is  rightly  used) 
is  the  object  to  which  the  name  applies.  But 
so  long  as  this  remains  constant,  the  particular 
description  involved  usually  makes  no  differ- 
ence to  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  the  proposi- 
tion in  which  the  name  appears. 

Let  us  take  some  illustrations.  Suppose 
some  statement  made  about  Bismarck.  As- 
suming that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  direct 
acquaintance  with  oneself,  Bismarck  himself 
might  have  used  his  name  directly  to  desig- 
nate the  particular  person  with  whom  he  was 
acquainted.  In  this  case,  if  he  made  a 
judgment  about  himself,  he  himself  might  be 
a  constituent  of  the  judgment.  Here  the 
proper  name  has  the  direct  use  which  it 
always  wishes  to  have,  as  simply  standing  for 
a  certain  object,  and  not  for  a  description 
of  the  object.  But  if  a  person  who  knew 
Bismarck  made  a  judgment  about  him,  the 
case  is  different.  What  this  person  was  ac- 
quainted with  were  certain  sense-data  which 
he  connected  (rightly,  we  will  suppose)  with 
Bismarck's  body.     His   body,  as  a  physical 


86    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

object,  and  still  more  his  mind,  were  only 
known  as  the  body  and  the  mijid  connected 
with  these  sense-data.  That  is,  they  were 
known  by  description.  It  is,  of  course,  very 
much  a  matter  of  chance  which  character- 
istics of  a  man's  appearance  will  come  into  a 
friend's  mind  when  he  thinks  of  him  ;  thus 
the  description  actually  in  the  friend's  mind 
is  accidental.  The  essential  point  is  that  he 
knows  that  the  various  descriptions  all  apply 
to  the  same  entity,  in  spite  of  not  being  ac- 
quainted with  the  entity  in  question. 

When  we,  who  did  not  know  Bismarck, 
make  a  judgment  about  him,  the  description 
in  our  minds  will  probably  be  some  more  or 
less  vague  mass  of  historical  knowledge — far 
more,  in  most  cases,  than  is  required  to  iden- 
tify him.  But,  for  the  sake  of  illustration,  let 
us  assume  that  we  think  of  him  as  "  the  first 
Chancellor  of  the  German  Empire."  Here 
all  the  words  are  abstract  except  "  German." 
The  word  "  German"  will,  again,  have  differ- 
ent meanings  for  different  people.  To  some  it 
will  recall  travels  in  Germany,  to  some  the 
look  of  Germany  on  the  map,  and  so  on.     But 


ACQUAINTANCE  AND  DESCRIPTION  87 

if  we  are  to  obtain  a  description  which  we 
know  to  be  applicable,  we  shall  be  compelled, 
at  some  point,  to  bring  in  a  reference  to  a 
particular  with  which  we  are  acquainted. 
Such  reference  is  involved  in  any  mention  of 
past,  present,  and  future  (as  opposed  to 
definite  dates),  or  of  here  and  there,  or  of  what 
others  have  told  us.  Thus  it  would  seem  that, 
in  some  way  or  other,  a  description  known  to 
be  applicable  to  a  particular  must  involve 
some  reference  to  a  particular  with  which  we 
are  acquainted,  if  our  knowledge  about  the 
thing  described  is  not  to  be  merely  what  follows 
logically  from  the  description.  For  example, 
"the  most  long-lived  of  men"  is  a  description 
involving  only  universals,  which  must  apply  to 
some  man,  but  we  can  make  no  judgments  con- 
cerning this  man  which  involve  knowledge 
about  him  beyond  what  the  description  gives. 
If,  however,  we  say,  "  The  first  Chancellor  of 
the  German  Empire  was  an  astute  diplo- 
matist," we  can  only  be  assured  of  the  truth 
of  our  judgment  in  virtue  of  something  with 
which  we  are  acquainted — usually  a  testimony 
heard  or  read.     Apart  from  the  information 


\ 


88    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

we  convey  to  others,  apart  from  the  fact  about 
the  actual  Bismarck,  which  gives  importance 
to  our  judgment,  the  thought  we  really  have 
contains  the  one  or  more  particulars  involved, 
and  otherwise  consists  wholly  of  concepts. 

All  names  of  places — London,  England, 
Europe,  the  Earth,  the  Solar  System — simi,- 
larly  involve,  when  used,  descriptions  which 
start  from  some  one  or  more  particulars  with 
which  we  are  acquainted.  I  suspect  that  even 
the  Universe,  as  considered  by  metaphysics, 
involves  such  a  connection  with  particulars. 
In  logic,  on  the  contrary,  where  we  are 
concerned  not  merely  with  what  does  exist, 
but  with  whatever  might  or  could  exist  or 
be,  no  reference  to  actual  particulars  is 
involved. 

It  would  seem  that,  when  we  make  a 
statement  about  something  only  known  by 
description,  we  often  intend  to  make  our 
statement,  not  in  the  form  involving  the 
description,  but  about  the  actual  thing  de- 
scribed. That  is  to  say,  when  we  say  any- 
thing about  Bismarck,  we  should  like,  if  we 
could,  to  make  the  judgment  which  Bismarck 


ACQUAINTANCE  AND  DESCRIPTION  89 

alone  can  make,  namely,  the  judgment  of 
which  he  himself  is  a  constituent.  In  this 
we  are  necessarily  defeated,  since  the  actual 
Bismarck  is  unknown  to  us.  But  we  know 
that  there  is  an  object  B,  called  Bismarck, 
and  that  B  was  an  astute  diplomatist.  We 
can  thus  describe  the  proposition  we  should 
like  to  affirm,  namely,  "  B  was  an  astute  diplo- 
matist," where  B  is  the  object  which  was 
Bismarck.  If  we  are  describing  Bismarck  as 
"  the  first  Chancellor  of  the  German  Empire," 
the  proposition  we  should  like  to  affirm  may 
be  described  as  "  the  proposition  asserting, 
concerning  the  actual  object  which  was  the 
first  Chancellor  of  the  German  Empire,  that 
this  object  was  an  astute  diplomatist." 
What  enables  us  to  communicate  in  spite  of 
the  varying  descriptions  we  employ  is  that 
we  know  there  is  a  true  proposition  concerning 
the  actual  Bismarck,  and  that  however  we 
may  vary  the  description  (so  long  as  the 
description  is  correct)  the  proposition  de- 
scribed is  still  the  same.  This  proposition, 
which  is  described  and  is  known  to  be  true, 
is  what  interests  us  ;  but  we  are  not  acquainted 


90    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

with  the  proposition  itself,  and  do  not  know 
it,  though  we  know  it  is  true. 

It  will  be  seen  that  there  are  various  stages 
in  the  removal  from  acquaintance  with 
particulars  :  there  is  Bismarck  to  people  who 
knew  him,  Bismarck  to  those  who  only  know 
of  him  through  history,  the  man  with  the 
iron  mask,  the  longest -lived  of  men.  These 
are  progressively  further  removed  from  ac- 
quaintance with  particulars  ;  the  first  comes 
as  near  to  acquaintance  as  is  possible  in 
regard  to  another  person ;  in  the  second,  we 
shall  still  be  said  to  know  "who  Bismarck 
was " ;  in  the  third,  we  do  not  know  who 
was  the  man  with  the  iron  mask,  though  we 
can  know  many  propositions  about  him  which 
are  not  logically  deducible  from  the  fact  that 
he  wore  an  iron  mask  ;  in  the  fourth,  finally, 
we  know  nothing  beyond  what  is  logically 
deducible  from  the  definition  of  the  man. 
There  is  a  similar  hierarchy  in  the  region  of 
universals.  Many  universals,  like  many  par- 
ticulars, are  only  known  to  us  by  description. 
But  here,  as  in  the  case  of  particulars,  know- 
ledge concerning  what  is  known  by  descrip- 


ACiJUAINTANCE  AND  DESCRIPTION  91 

tion    is    ultimately   reducible    to   knowledge 
concerning  what  is  known  by  acquaintance. 

The  fundamental  principle  in  the  analysis 
of  propositions  containing  descriptions  is  this : 
Every  'proposition  which  we  can  understand] 
must  be  composed  wholly  of  constituents  with 
ivhich  we  are  acquainted. 

We  shall  not  at  this  stage  attempt  to 
answer  all  the  objections  which  may  be  urged 
against  this  fundamental  principle.  For  the 
present,  we  shall  merely  point  out  that,  in 
some  way  or  other,  it  must  be  possible  to 
meet  these  objections,  for  it  is  scarcely 
conceivable  that  we  can  make  a  judgment 
or  entertain  a  supposition  without  knowing 
what  it  is  tliat  we  are  judging  or  supposing 
about.  We  must  attach  some  meaning  to 
the  words  we  use,  if  we  are  to  speak  signi- 
ficantly and  not  utter  mere  noise ;  and  the 
meaning  we  attach  to  our  words  must  be 
something  with  which  we  are  acquainted. 
Thus  when,  for  example,  we  make  a  state- 
ment about  Julius  Ctesar,  it  is  plain  that 
Julius  Csesar  himself  is  not  before  our  minds, 
since  we  are  not  acquainted  with  him.     We 


92    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

have  in  mind  some  description  of  Julius 
Caesar  :  "  the  man  who  was  assassinated  on 
the  Ides  of  March,"  "the  founder  of  the  Ro- 
man Empire,"  or,  perhaps,  merely  "the  man 
whose  name  was  Julius  CcBsar."  (In  this  last 
description,  Julius  Cossar  is  a  noise  or  shape 
with  which  we  are  acquainted.)  Thus  our 
statement  does  not  mean  quite  what  it  seems 
to  mean,  but  means  something  involving, 
instead  of  Julius  Caesar,  some  description  of 
him  which  is  composed  wholly  of  particulars 
and  universals  with  which  we  are  acquainted. 
The  chief  importance  of  knowledge  by 
description  is  that  it  enables  us  to  pass 
beyond  the  limits  of  our  private  experience. 
In  spite  of  the  fact  that  we  can  only  know 
truths  which  are  wholly  composed  of  terms 
which  we  have  experienced  in  acquaintance, 
we  can  yet  have  knowledge  by  description 
of  things  which  we  have  never  experienced. 
In  view  of  the  very  narrow  range  of  our 
immediate  experience,  this  result  is  vital, 
and  until  it  is  understood,  much  of  our  know- 
ledge must  remain  mysterious  and  therefore 
doubtful. 


CHAPTER    VI 

ON  INDUCTION 

In  almost  all  our  previous  discussions  we 
have  been  concerned  in  the  attempt  to  get 
clear  as  to  our  data  in  the  way  of  knowledge 
of  existence.  What  things  are  there  in  the 
universe  whose  existence  is  known  to  us  owing 
to  our  being  acquainted  with  them  ?  So  far, 
our  answer  has  been  that  we  are  acquainted 
with  our  sense-data,  and,  probably,  with  our- 
selves. These  we  know  to  exist.  And  past 
sense-data  which  are  remembered  are  known 
to  have  existed  in  the  past.  This  know- 
ledge supplies  our  data. 

But  if  we  are  to  be  able  to  draw  inferences 
from  these  data — if  we  are  to  know  of  the 
existence  of  matter,  of  other  people,  of  the 
past  before  our  individual  memory  begins, 
or  of  tiie  future,  we  must  know  general  prin- 

93 


94    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

ciples  of  some  kind  by  means  of  which  such 
inferences  can  be  drawn.  It  must  be  known 
to  us  that  the  existence  of  some  one  sort  of 
thing,  A,  is  a  sign  of  the  existence  of  some 
other  sort  of  thing,  B,  either  at  the  same  time 
as  A  or  at  some  earher  or  later  time,  as,  for 
example,  thunder  is  a  sign  of  the  earlier 
existence  of  lightning.  If  this  were  not  known 
to  us,  we  could  never  extend  our  knowledge 
beyond  the  sphere  of  our  private  experience ; 
and  this  sphere,  as  we  have  seen,  is  exceed- 
ingly limited.  The  question  we  have  now  to 
consider  is  whether  such  an  extension  is 
possible,  and  if  so,  how  it  is  effected. 

Let  us  take  as  an  illustration  a  matter  about 
which  none  of  us,  in  fact,  feel  the  slightest 
doubt.  We  are  all  convinced  that  the  sun 
will  rise  to-morrow.  Why  ?  Is  this  belief  a 
mere  blind  outcome  of  past  experience,  or 
can  it  be  justified  as  a  reasonable  belief  ?  It 
is  not  easy  to  find  a  test  by  which  to  judge 
whether  a  belief  of  this  kind  is  reasonable  or 
not,  but  we  can  at  least  ascertain  what  sort 
of  general  beliefs  would  suffice,  if  true,  to 
justify  the  judgment  that  the  sun  will  rise 


ON   INDUCTION  95 

to-morrow,  and  the  many  other  similar  judg- 
ments upon  which  our  actions  are  based. 

It  is  obvious  that  if  we  are  asked  why  we 
believe  that  the  sun  will  rise  to-morrow,  we 
shall   naturally  answer,  "  Because  it  always 
has  risen  every  day."     We  have  a  firm  belief 
that  it  will  rise  in  the  future,  because  it  has 
risen  in  the  past.     If  we  are  challenged  as  to 
why  we  believe  that  it  will  continue  to  rise 
as  heretofore,  we  may  appeal  to  the  laws  of 
motion  :    the  earth,  we  shall  say,  is  a  freely 
rotating  body,  and  such  bodies  do  not  cease 
to   rotate   unless   something  interferes  from 
outside,    and    there    is    nothing    outside   to 
interfere  with  the  earth  between   now  and 
to-morrow.     Of  course  it  might  be  doubted 
whether  we  are  quite  certain  that  there  is 
nothing  outside  to  interfere,  but  this  is  not 
the     interesting     doubt.      The     interesting 
doubt  is  as  to  whether  the  laws  of  motion 
will  remain  in  operation  until  to-morrow.     If 
this  doubt  is  raised,  we  find  ourselves  in  the 
same  position  as  when  the  doubt  about  the 
sunrise  was  first  raised. 
The  only  reason  for  believing  that  the  laws 


96    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

of  motion  will  remain  in  operation  is  that 
they  have  operated  hitherto,  so  far  as  our 
knowledge  of  the  past  enables  us  to  judge. 
It  is  true  that  we  have  a  greater  body  of 
evidence  from  the  past  in  favour  of  the  laws 
of  motion  than  we  have  in  favour  of  the  sun- 
rise, because  the  sunrise  is  merely  a  particular 
case  of  fulfilment  of  the  laws  of  motion,  and 
there  are  countless  other  particular  cases. 
But  the  real  question  is  :  Do  any  number 
of  cases  of  a  law  being  fulfilled  in  the  past 
afford  evidence  that  it  will  be  fulfilled  in  the 
future  ?  If  not,  it  becomes  plain  that  we 
have  no  ground  whatever  for  expecting  the 
sun  to  rise  to-morrow,  or  for  expecting  the 
bread  we  shall  eat  at  our  next  meal  not  to 
poison  us,  or  for  any  of  the  other  scarcely 
conscious  expectations  that  control  our  daily 
lives.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  all  such 
expectations  are  only  probable  ;  thus  we  have 
not  to  seek  for  a  proof  that  they  must  be  ful- 
filled, but  only  for  some  reason  in  favour  of 
the  view  that  they  are  likely  to  be  fulfilled. 

Now  in  dealing  with  this  question  we  must, 
to  begin  with,  make  an  important  distinction, 


ON  INDUCTION  97 

without  which  we  should  soon  become  in- 
volved in  hopeless  confusions.  Experience 
has  shown  us  that,  hitherto,  the  frequent 
repetition  of  some  uniform  succession  or 
coexistence  has  been  a  cause  of  our  expecting 
the  same  succession  or  coexistence  on  the 
next  occasion.  Food  that  has  a  certain 
appearance  generally  has  a  certain  taste,  and 
it  is  a  severe  shock  to  our  expectations  when 
the  familiar  appearance  is  found  to  be  asso- 
ciated with  an  unusual  taste.  Things  which 
we  see  become  associated,  by  habit,  with 
certain  tactile  sensations  which  we  expect 
if  we  touch  them  ;  one  of  the  horrors  of  a 
ghost  (in  many  ghost-stories)  is  that  it  fails 
to  give  us  any  sensations  of  touch.  Unedu- 
cated people  who  go  abroad  for  the  first  time 
are  so  surprised  as  to  be  incredulous  when 
they  find  their  native  language  not  under- 
stood. 

And  this  kind  of  association  is  not  confined 
to  men  ;  in  animals  also  it  is  very  strong. 
A  horse  which  has  been  often  driven  along  a 
certain  road  resists  the  attempt  to  drive  him 
in  a  different  direction.     Domestic  animals 

D 


98    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

expect  food  when  they  see  the  person  who 
usually  feeds  them.  We  know  that  all  these 
rather  crude  expectations  of  uniformity  are 
liable  to  be  misleading.  The  man  who  has 
fed  the  chicken  every  day  throughout  its  life 
at  last  wrings  its  neck  instead,  showing  that 
more  refined  views  as  to  the  uniformity  of 
nature  would  have  been  useful  to  the  chicken. 

But  in  spite  of  the  misleadingness  of  such 
expectations,  they  nevertheless  exist.  The 
mere  fact  that  something  has  happened  a 
certain  number  of  times  causes  animals  and 
men  to  expect  that  it  will  happen  again. 
Thus  our  instincts  certainly  cause  us  to  believe 
that  the  sun  will  rise  to-morrow,  but  we  may 
be  in  no  better  a  position  than  the  chicken 
which  unexpectedly  has  its  neck  wrung.  We 
have  therefore  to  distinguish  the  fact  that 
past  uniformities  cause  expectations  as  to  the 
future,  from  the  question  whether  there  is 
any  reasonable  ground  for  giving  weight  to 
such  expectations  after  the  question  of  their 
validity  has  been  raised. 

The  problem  we  have  to  discuss  is  whether 
there  is  any  reason  for  believing  in  what  is 


ON  INDUCTION  99 

called  "  the  uniformity  of  nature."  The 
belief  in  the  uniformity  of  nature  is  the  belief 
that  everything  that  has  happened  or  will 
happen  is  an  instance  of  some  general  law 
to  which  there  are  no  exceptions.  The  crude 
expectations  which  we  have  been  considering 
are  all  subject  to  exceptions,  and  therefore 
liable  to  disappoint  those  who  entertain  them. 
But  science  habitually  assumes,  at  least  as 
a  working  hypothesis,  that  general  rules 
which  have  exceptions  can  be  replaced  by 
general  rules  which  have  no  exceptions. 
"  Unsupported  bodies  in  air  fall  "  is  a  general 
rule  to  which  balloons  and  aeroplanes  are 
exceptions.  But  the  laws  of  motion  and  the 
law  of  gravitation,  which  account  for  the 
fact  that  most  bodies  fall,  also  account  for 
the  fact  that  balloons  and  aeroplanes  can  rise  ; 
thus  the  laws  of  motion  and  the  law  of  gravi- 
tation are  not  subject  to  these  exceptions. 

The  belief  that  the  sun  will  rise  to-morrow 
might  be  falsified  if  the  earth  came  suddenly 
into  contact  with  a  large  body  which  destroyed 
its  rotation  ;  but  the  laws  of  motion  and  the 
law  of  gravitation  would  not  be  infringed  by 


100    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

such  an  event.  The  business  of  science  is  to 
find  uniformities,  such  as  the  laws  of  motion 
and  the  law  of  gravitation,  to  which,  so  far 
as  our  experience  extends,  there  are  no  ex- 
ceptions. In  this  search  science  has  been 
remarkably  successful,  and  it  may  be  conceded 
that  such  uniformities  have  held  hitherto. 
This  brings  us  back  to  the  question :  Have 
we  any  reason,  assuming  that  they  have 
always  held  in  the  past,  to  suppose  that  they 
will  hold  in  the  future  ? 

It  has  been  argued  that  we  have  reason  to 
know  that  the  future  will  resemble  the  past, 
because  what  was  the  future  has  constantly 
become  the  past,  and  has  always  been  found 
to  resemble  the  past,  so  that  we  really  have 
experience  of  the  future,  namely  of  times 
which  were  formerly  future,  which  we  may 
call  past  futures.  But  such  an  argument 
really  begs  the  very  question  at  issue.  We 
have  experience  of  past  futures,  but  not  of 
future  futures,  and  the  question  is  :  Will  future 
futures  resemble  past  futures  ?  This  ques- 
tion is  not  to  be  answered  by  an  argument 
which  starts  from  past  futures  alone.     We 


ON   INDUCTION  101 

have  therefore  still  to  seek  for  some  principle 
which  shall  enable  us  to  know  that  the  future 
will  follow  the  same  laws  as  the  past. 

The  reference  to  the  future  in  this  question 
is  not  essential.  The  same  question  arises 
when  we  apply  the  laws  that  work  in  our 
experience  to  past  things  of  which  we  have 
no  experience — as,  for  example,  in  geology, 
or  in  theories  as  to  the  origin  of  the  Solar 
System.  The  question  we  really  have  to  ask 
is  :  "  When  two  things  have  been  found  to  be 
often  associated,  and  no  instance  is  known 
of  the  one  occurring  without  the  other,  does 
the  occurrence  of  one  of  the  two,  in  a  fresh 
instance,  give  any  good  ground  for  expecting 
the  other  ?  "  On  our  answer  to  this  question 
must  depend  the  validity  of  the  whole  of  our 
expectations  as  to  the  future,  the  whole  of 
the  results  obtained  by  induction,  and  in  fact 
practically  all  the  beliefs  upon  which  our 
daily  life  is  based. 

It  must  be  conceded,  to  begin  with,  that 
the  fact  that  two  things  have  been  found  often 
together  and  never  apart  does  not,  by  itself, 
suffice  to  prove  demonstratively  that  they 


102    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

will  be  found  together  in  the  next  case  we 
examine.  The  most  we  can  hope  is  that  the 
oftener  things  are  found  together,  the  more 
probable  it  becomes  that  they  will  be  found 
together  another  time,  and  that,  if  they  have 
been  found  together  often  enough,  the  prob- 
ability will  amount  almost  to  certainty.  It 
can  never  quite  reach  certainty,  because  we 
know  that  in  spite  of  frequent  repetitions 
there  sometimes  is  a  failure  at  the  last,  as 
in  the  case  of  the  chicken  whose  neck  is  wrung. 
Thus  probability  is  all  we  ought  to  seek. 

It  might  be  urged,  as  against  the  view  we 
are  advocating,  that  we  know  all  natural 
phenomena  to  be  subject  to  the  reign  of  law, 
and  that  sometimes,  on  the  basis  of  observa- 
tion, we  can  see  that  only  one  law  can  possibly 
fit  the  facts  of  the  case.  Now  to  this  view 
there  are  two  answers.  The  first  is  that, 
even  if  some  law  which  has  no  exceptions 
applies  to  our  case,  we  can  never,  in  practice, 
be  sure  that  we  have  discovered  that  law  and 
not  one  to  which  there  are  exceptions.  The 
second  is  that  the  reign  of  law  would  seem  to 
be  itself  only  probable,  and  that  our  belief 


ON  INDUCTION  103 

that  it  will  hold  in  the  future,  or  in  unexamined 
cases  in  the  past,  is  itself  based  upon  the  very 
principle  we  are  examining. 

The  principle  we  are  examining  may  be 
called  the  principle  of  induction,  and  its  two 
parts  may  be  stated  as  follows : 

(a)  When  a  thing  of  a  certain  sort  A  has 
been  found  to  be  associated  with  a  thing  of  a 
certain  other  sort  B,  and  has  never  been  found 
dissociated  from  a  thing  of  the  sort  B,  the 
greater  the  number  of  cases  in  which  A  and  B 
have  been  associated,  the  greater  is  the 
probability  that  they  will  be  associated  in  a 
fresh  case  in  which  one  of  them  is  known  to 
be  present ; 

(6)  Under  the  same  circumstances,  a  suffi- 
cient number  of  cases  of  association  will  make 
the  probability  of  a  fresh  association  nearly 
a  certainty,  and  will  make  it  approach  cer- 
tainty without  limit. 

As  just  stated,  the  principle  applies  only  to 
the  verification  of  our  expectation  in  a  single 
fresh  instance.  But  we  want  also  to  know 
that  there  is  a  probability  in  favour  of  the 
general  law  that  things  of  the  sort  A  are 


104    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

always  associated  with  things  of  the  sort  B, 
provided  a  sufficient  number  of  cases  of 
association  are  known,  and  no  cases  of  failure 
of  association  are  known.  The  probabihty  of 
the  general  law  is  obviously  less  than  the 
probability  of  the  particular  case,  since  if 
the  general  law  is  true,  the  particular  case 
must  also  be  true,  whereas  the  particular 
case  may  be  true  without  the  general  law  being 
true.  Nevertheless  the  probability  of  the 
general  law  is  increased  by  repetitions,  just 
as  the  probability  of  the  particular  case  is. 
We  may  therefore  repeat  the  two  parts  of 
our  principle  as  regards  the  general  law, 
thus  : 

(a)  The  greater  the  number  of  cases  in 
which  a  thing  of  the  sort  A  has  been  found 
associated  with  a  thing  of  the  sort  B,  the  more 
probable  it  is  (if  no  cases  of  failure  of  associa- 
tion are  known)  that  A  is  always  associated 
with  B  ; 

{b)  Under  the  same  circumstances,  a  suffi- 
cient number  of  cases  of  the  association  of 
A  with  B  will  make  it  nearlv  certain  that  A 
is  always  associated  with  B,  and  will  make 


ON   INDUCTION  105 

this  general  law  approach  certainty  without 
limit. 

It  should  be  noted  that  probability  is 
always  relative  to  certain  data.  In  our  case, 
the  data  are  merely  the  known  cases  of  co- 
existence of  A  and  B.  There  may  be  other 
data,  which  might  be  taken  into  account, 
which  would  gravely  alter  the  probability. 
For  example,  a  man  who  had  seen  a  great 
many  white  swans  might  argue,  by  our  prin- 
ciple, that  on  the  data  it  was  probable  that  all 
swans  were  white,  and  this  might  be  a  per- 
fectly sound  argument.  The  argument  is 
not  disproved  by  the  fact  that  some  swans 
are  black,  because  a  thing  may  very  well 
happen  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  some  data 
render  it  improbable.  In  the  case  of  the 
swans,  a  man  might  know  that  colour  is  a 
very  variable  characteristic  in  many  species 
of  animals,  and  that,  therefore,  an  induction 
as  to  colour  is  peculiarly  liable  to  error. 
But  this  knowledge  would  be  a  fresh  datum, 
by  no  means  proving  that  the  probability 
relatively  to  our  previous  data  had  been 
wrongly  estimated.     The  fact,  therefore,  that 


106    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

things  often  fail  to  fulfil  our  expectations 
is  no  evidence  that  our  expectations  will  not 
probably  be  fulfilled  in  a  given  case  or  a  given 
class  of  cases.  Thus  our  inductive  principle 
is  at  any  rate  not  capable  of  being  disproved 
by  an  appeal  to  experience. 

The  inductive  principle,  however,  is  equally 
incapable  of  being  proved  by  an  appeal  to 
experience.  Experience  might  conceivably 
confirm  the  inductive  principle  as  regards  the 
cases  that  have  been  already  examined  ;  but 
as  regards  unexamined  cases,  it  is  the  in- 
ductive principle  alone  that  can  justify  any 
inference  from  what  has  been  examined  to 
what  has  not  been  examined.  All  arguments 
which,  on  the  basis  of  experience,  argue  as 
to  the  future  or  the  unexperienced  parts  of  the 
past  or  present,  assume  the  inductive  prin- 
ciple ;  hence  we  can  never  use  experience  to 
prove  the  inductive  principle  without  begging 
the  question.  Thus  we  must  either  accept 
the  inductive  principle  on  the  ground  of  its 
intrinsic  evidence,  or  forgo  all  justification 
1  of  our  expectations  about  the  future.  If  the 
principle  is  unsound,  we  have  no  reason  to 


ON   INDUCTION  107 

expect  the  sun  to  rise  to-morrow,  to  expect 
bread  to  be  more  nourishing  than  a  stone,  or 
to  expect  that  if  we  throw  ourselves  off  the 
roof  we  shall  fall.  When  we  see  what  looks 
like  our  best  friend  approaching  us,  we  shall 
have  no  reason  to  suppose  that  his  body  is 
not  inhabited  by  the  mind  of  our  worst  enemy 
or  of  some  total  stranger.  All  our  conduct  is 
based  upon  associations  which  have  worked 
in  the  past,  and  which  we  therefore  regard  as 
likely  to  work  in  the  future  ;  and  this  likeli- 
hood is  dependent  for  its  validity  upon  the 
inductive  principle. 

The  general  principles  of  science,  such  as 
the  belief  in  the  reign  of  law,  and  the  belief 
that  every  event  must  have  a  cause,  are  as 
completely  dependent  upon  the  inductive 
principle  as  are  the  beliefs  of  daily  life.  All 
such  general  principles  are  believed  because 
mankind  have  found  innumerable  instances  of 
their  truth,  and  no  instances  of  their  false- 
hood. But  this  affords  no  evidence  for  their 
truth  in  the  future,  unless  the  inductive 
principle  is  assumed. 

Thus  all  knowledge  which,  on  a  basis  of 


108    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

experience,  tells  us  something  about  what  is 
not  experienced,  is  based  upon  a  belief  which 
experience  can  neither  confirm  nor  confute, 
yet  which,  at  least  in  its  more  concrete  appli- 
cations, appears  to  be  as  firmly  rooted  in  us 
as  many  of  the  facts  of  experience.  The 
existence  and  justification  of  such  beliefs — 
for  the  inductive  principle,  as  we  shall  see, 
is  not  the  only  example — raises  some  of  the 
most  difficult  and  most  debated  problems  of 
philosophy.  We  will,  in  the  next  chapter, 
consider  briefly  what  may  be  said  to  account 
for  such  knowledge,  and  what  is  its  scope  and 
its  degree  of  certainty. 


CHAPTER    VII 

ON  OUR  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GENERAL  PRINCIPLES 

We  saw  in  the  preceding  chapter  that 
the  principle  of  induction,  while  necessary 
to  the  validity  of  all  arguments  based  on 
experience,  is  itself  not  capable  of  being 
proved  by  experience,  and  yet  is  unhesitat- 
ingly believed  by  every  one,  at  least  in  all  its 
concrete  applications.  In  these  character- 
istics the  principle  of  induction  does  not  stand 
alone.  There  are  a  number  of  other  prin- 
ciples which  cannot  be  proved  or  disproved  by 
experience,  but  are  used  in  arguments  which 
start  from  what  is  experienced. 

Some  of  these  principles  have  even  greater 
evidence  than  the  principle  of  induction, 
and  the  knowledge  of  them  has  the  same 
degree  of  certainty  as  the  knowledge  of  the 
existence  of  sense-data.     They  constitute  the 

109 


110    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

means  of  drawing  inferences  from  what  is 
given  in  sensation  ;  and  if  what  we  infer  is 
to  be  true,  it  is  just  as  necessary  that  our 
principles  of  inference  should  be  true  as  it 
is  that  our  data  should  be  true.  The  prin- 
ciples of  inference  are  apt  to  be  overlooked 
because  of  their  very  obviousness — the  as- 
sumption involved  is  assented  to  without  our 
realising  that  it  is  an  assumption.  But  it  is 
very  important  to  realise  the  use  of  principles 
of  inference,  if  a  correct  theory  of  knowledge 
is  to  be  obtained  ;  for  our  knowledge  of  them 
raises  interesting  and  difficult  questions. 

In  all  our  knowledge  of  general  principles, 
what  actually  happens  is  that  first  of  all  we 
realise  some  particular  application  of  the 
principle,  and  then  we  realise  that  the  particu- 
larity is  irrelevant,  andthatthere  is  a  generality 
which  may  equally  truly  be  affirmed.  This 
is  of  course  familiar  in  such  matters  as  teach- 
ing arithmetic  :  "  two  and  two  are  four  "  is 
first  learnt  in  the  case  of  some  particular  pair 
of  couples,  and  then  in  some  other  particular 
case,  and  so  on,  until  at  last  it  becomes  possible 
to  see  that  it  is  true  of  any  pair  of  couples. 


GENERAL   PRINCIPLES  111 

The  same  thing  happens  with  logical  prin- 
ciples. Suppose  two  men  are  discussing 
what  day  of  the  month  it  is.  One  of  them 
says,  "  At  least  you  will  admit  that  if  yester- 
day was  the  15th  to-day  must  be  the  16th." 
"Yes,"  says  the  other,  "I  admit  that." 
"  And  you  know,"  the  first  continues,  "that 
yesterday  was  the  15th,  because  you  dined 
with  Jones,  and  your  diary  will  tell  you  that 
was  on  the  15th."  "  Yes,"  says  the  second  ; 
"  therefore  to-day  is  the  16th." 

Now  such  an  argument  is  not  hard  to  follow ; 
and  if  it  is  granted  that  its  premisses  are  true 
in  fact,  no  one  will  deny  that  the  conclusion 
must  also  be  true.  But  it  depends  for  its 
truth  upon  an  instance  of  a  general  logical 
principle.  The  logical  principle  is  as  follows  : 
"  Suppose  it  known  that  if  this  is  true,  then 
that  is  true.  Suppose  it  also  known  that  this 
is  true,  then  it  follows  that  that  is  true." 
When  it  is  the  case  that  if  this  is  true,  that 
is  true,  we  shall  say  that  this  "  implies  "  that, 
and  that  that  "  follows  from  "  this.  Thus 
our  principle  states  that  if  this  implies  that, 
and  this  is  true,  then  that  is  true.     In  other 


112     THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

words,  "  anything  implied  by  a  true  pro- 
position is  true,"  or  "  whatever  follows  from 
a  true  proposition  is  true." 

This  principle  is  really  involved — at  least, 
concrete  instances  of  it  are  involved — in  all 
demonstrations.  Whenever  one  thing  which 
we  believe  is  used  to  prove  something  else, 
which  we  consequently  believe,  this  principle 
is  relevant.  If  any  one  asks :  "  Why 
should  I  accept  the  results  of  valid  arguments 
based  on  true  premisses  ? "  we  can  only 
answer  by  appealing  to  our  principle.  In 
fact,  the  truth  of  the  principle  is  impossible 
to  doubt,  and  its  obviousness  is  so  great  that 
at  first  sight  it  seems  almost  trivial.  Such 
principles,  however, » are  not  trivial  to  the 
philosopher,  for  they  show  that  we  may  have 
indubitable  knowledge  which  is  in  no  way 
derived  from  objects  of  sense. 

The  above  principle  is  merely  one  of  a 
certain  number  of  self-evident  logical  prin- 
ciples. Some  at  least  of  these  principles  must 
be  granted  before  any  argument  or  proof 
becomes  possible.  When  some  of  them  have 
been  granted,  others  can  be  proved,  though 


GENERAL  PRINCIPLES  113 

these  others,  so  long  as  they  are  simple,  are 
just  as  obvious  as  the  principles  taken  for 
granted.  For  no  very  good  reason,  three  of 
these  principles  have  been  singled  out  by 
tradition  under  the  name  of  "  Laws  of 
Thought." 

They  are  as  follows  : 

(1)  The  law  of  identity:  "Whatever  is, 
is." 

(2)  The  law  of  contradiction :  "  Nothing 
can  both  be  and  not  be." 

(3)  The  law  of  excluded  middle :  "  Every- 
thing must  either  be  or  not  be." 

These  three  laws  are  samples  of  self-evident 
logical  principles,  but  are  not  really  more 
fundamental  or  more  self-evident  than  various 
other  similar  principles  :  for  instance,  the  one 
we  considered  just  now,  which  states  that 
what  follows  from  a  true  premiss  is  true. 
The  name  "  laws  of  thought  "  is  also  mis- 
leading, for  what  is  important  is  not  the  fact 
that  we  think  in  accordance  with  these  laws, 
but  the  fact  that  things  behave  in  accordance 
with  them  ;  in  other  words,  the  fact  that  when 
we  think  in  accordance  with  them  we  think 


114    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

truly.  But  this  is  a  large  question,  to  which 
we  must  return  at  a  later  stage. 

In  addition  to  the  logical  principles  which 
enable  us  to  prove  from  a  given  premiss  that 
something  is  certainly  true,  there  are  other 
logical  principles  which  enable  us  to  prove, 
from  a  given  premiss,  that  there  is  a  greater 
or  less  probability  that  something  is  true. 
An  example  of  such  principles — perhaps  the 
most  important  example — is  the  inductive 
principle,  which  we  considered  in  the  pre- 
ceding chapter. 

One  of  the  great  historic  controversies  in 
philosophy  is  the  controversy  between  the 
two  schools  called  respectively  "empiricists  " 
and  "  rationalists."  The  empiricists — who 
are  best  represented  by  the  British  philo- 
sophers, Locke,  Berkeley,  and  Hume — main- 
tained that  all  our  knowledge  is  derived  from 
experience  ;  the  rationalists — who  are  repre- 
sented by  the  Continental  philosophers  of  the 
seventeenth  century,  especially  Descartes  and 
Leibniz — maintained  that,  in  addition  to 
what  we  know  by  experience,  there  are  certain 
**  innate    ideas "    and    "  innate    principles," 


GENERAL  PRINCIPLES  115 

which  we  know  independently  of  experience. 
It  has  now  become  possible  to  decide  with 
some  confidence  as  to  the  truth  or  falsehood  of 
these  opposing  schools.  It  must  be  admitted, 
for  the  reasons  already  stated,  that  logical 
principles  are  known  to  us,  and  cannot  be 
themselves  proved  by  experience,  since  all 
proof  presupposes  them.  In  this,  therefore, 
which  was  the  most  important  point  of  the 
controversy,  the  rationalists  were  in  the 
right. 

On  the  other  hand,  even  that  part  of  our 
knowledge  which  is  logically  independent  of 
experience  (in  the  sense  that  experience  can- 
not prove  it)  is  yet  elicited  and  caused  by 
experience.  It  is  on  occasion  of  particular  ex- 
periences that  we  become  aware  of  the  general 
laws  which  their  connections  exemplify. 
It  would  certainly  be  absurd  to  suppose  that 
there  are  innate  principles  in  the  sense  that 
babies  are  born  with  a  knowledge  of  every- 
thing which  men  know  and  which  cannot  be 
deduced  from  what  is  experienced.  For  this 
reason,  the  word  "  innate  "  would  not  now 
be  employed  to  describe  our  knowledge  of 


116    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

logical  principles.  The  phrase  "  a  pn'on  "  is 
less  objectionable,  and  is  more  usual  in  modern 
writers.  Thus,  while  admitting  that  all  know- 
ledge is  elicited  and  caused  by  experience,  we 
shall  nevertheless  hold  that  some  knowledge 
is  a  priori^  in  the  sense  that  the  experience 
which  makes  us  think  of  it  does  not  suffice  to 
prove  it,  but  merely  so  directs  our  attention 
that  we  see  its  truth  without  requiring  any 
proof  from  experience. 

There  is  another  point  of  great  importance, 
in  which  the  empiricists  were  in  the  right 
as  against  the  rationalists.  Nothing  can  be 
known  to  exist  except  by  the  help  of  experi- 
ence. That  is  to  say,  if  we  wish  to  prove 
that  something  of  which  we  have  no  direct 
experience  exists,  we  must  have  among  our 
premisses  the  existence  of  one  or  more  things 
of  which  we  have  direct  experience.  Our  be- 
lief that  the  Emperor  of  Russia  exists,  for 
example,  rests  upon  testimony,  and  testimony 
consists,  in  the  last  analysis,  of  sense-data 
seen  or  heard  in  reading  or  being  spoken 
to.  Rationalists  believed  that,  from  general 
consideration  as  to  what  must  be,  they  could 


GENERAL   PRINCIPLES  117 

deduce  the  existence  of  this  or  that  in  the 
actual  world.  In  this  belief  they  seem  to 
have  been  mistaken.  All  the  knowledge  that 
we  can  acquire  a  priori  concerning  existence 
seems  to  be  hypothetical :  it  tells  us  that  if 
one  thing  exists,  another  must  exist,  or,  more 
generally,  that  if  one  proposition  is  true, 
another  must  be  true.  This  is  exemplified  by 
the  principles  we  have  already  dealt  with,  such 
as''  if  this  is  true,  and  this  implies  that,  then 
that  is  true,"  or  "  if  this  and  that  have  been 
repeatedly  found  connected,  they  will  prob- 
ably be  connected  in  the  next  instance  in 
which  one  of  them  is  found."  Thus  the  scope 
and  power  of  a  priori  principles  is  strictly 
limited.  All  knowledge  that  something  exists 
must  be  in  part  dependent  on  experience. 
When  anything  is  known  immediately,  its 
existence  is  known  by  experience  alone  ;  when 
anything  is  proved  to  exist,  without  being 
known  immediately,  both  experience  and  a 
priori  principles  must  be  required  in  the  proof. 
Knowledge  is  called  empirical  when  it  rests 
wholly  or  partly  upon  experience.  Thus  all 
knowledge  which  asserts  existence  is  empirical. 


118    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

and  the  only  a  priori  knowledge  concerning 
existence  is  hypothetical,  giving  connections 
among  things  that  exist  or  may  exist,  but 
not  giving  actual  existence. 

A  priori  knowledge  is  not  all  of  the  logical 
kind  we  have  been  hitherto  considering. 
Perhaps  the  most  important  example  of  non- 
logical  a  priori  knowledge  is  knowledge  as  to 
ethical  value.  I  am  not  speaking  of  judg- 
ments as  to  what  is  useful  or  as  to  what  is 
virtuous,  for  such  judgments  do  require 
empirical  premisses  ;  I  am  speaking  of  judg- 
ments as  to  the  intrinsic  desirability  of  things. 
If  something  is  useful,  it  must  be  useful  because 
it  secures  some  end;  the  end  must,  if  we  have 
gone  far  enough,  be  valuable  on  its  own  ac- 
count, and  not  merely  because  it  is  useful  for 
some  further  end.  Thus  all  judgments  as 
to  what  is  useful  depend  upon  judgments  as 
to  what  has  value  on  its  own  account. 

We  judge,  for  example,  that  happiness  is 
more  desirable  than  misery,  knowledge  than 
ignorance,  goodwill  than  hatred,  and  so  on. 
Such  judgments  must,  in  part  at  least,  be 
immediate  and  a  priori.    Like  our  previous 


GENERAL   PRINCIPLES  119 

a  priori  judgments,  they  may  be  elicited  by 
experience,  and  indeed  they  must  be  ;  for  it 
seems  not  possible  to  judge  whether  anything 
is  intrinsically  valuable  unless  we  have 
experienced  something  of  the  same  kind. 
But  it  is  fairly  obvious  that  they  cannot  be 
proved  by  experience  ;  for  the  fact  that  a 
thing  exists  or  does  not  exist  cannot  prove 
either  that  it  is  good  that  it  should  exist  or 
that  it  is  bad.  The  pursuit  of  this  subject 
belongs  to  ethics,  where  the  impossibility 
of  deducing  what  ought  to  be  from  what  is 
has  to  be  established.  In  the  present  con- 
nection, it  is  only  important  to  realise  that 
knowledge  as  to  what  is  intrinsically  of  value 
is  a  priori  in  the  same  sense  in  which  logic 
is  a  priori,  namely  in  the  sense  that  the  truth 
of  such  knowledge  can  be  neither  proved  nor 
disproved  by  experience. 

All  pure  mathematics  is  a  priori,  like  logic. 
This  was  strenuously  denied  by  the  empirical 
philosophers,  who  maintained  that  experience 
was  as  much  the  source  of  our  knowledge  of 
arithmetic  as  of  our  knowledge  of  geography. 
They  maintained  that  by  the  repeated  ex- 


120    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

perience  of  seeing  two  things  and  two  other 
things,  and  finding  that  altogether  they  made 
four  things,  we  were  led  by  induction  to  the 
conclusion  that  two  things  and  two  other 
things  would  always  make  four  things  alto- 
gether. If,  however,  this  were  the  source  of 
our  knowledge  that  two  and  two  are  four, 
we  should  proceed  differently,  in  persuading 
ourselves  of  its  truth,  from  the  way  in  which 
we  do  actually  proceed.  In  fact,  a  certain 
number  of  instances  are  needed  to  make  us 
think  of  two  abstractly,  rather  than  of  two 
coins  or  two  books  or  two  people,  or  two  of 
any  other  specified  kind.  But  as  soon  as  we 
are  able  to  divest  our  thoughts  of  irrelevant 
particularity,  we  become  able  to  see  the 
general  principle  that  two  and  two  are  four ; 
any  one  instance  is  seen  to  be  typical,  and  the 
examination  of  other  instances  becomes  un- 
necessary.* 

The  same  thing  is  exemplified  in  geometry. 
If  we  want  to  prove  some  property  of  all 
triangles,    we   draw   some   one   triangle   and 

*  Cf.  A.  N.  Whitehead,  Introduction  to  Mathematics 
(Home  University  Library). 


GENERAL   PRINCIPLES  121 

reason  about  it ;  but  we  can  avoid  making 
use  of  any  property  which  it  does  not  share 
with  all  other  triangles,  and  thus,  from  our 
particular  case,  we  obtain  a  general  result. 
We  do  not,  in  fact,  feel  our  certainty  that 
two  and  two  are  four  increased  by  fresh 
instances,  because,  as  soon  as  we  have  seen 
the  truth  of  this  proposition,  our  certainty 
becomes  so  great  as  to  be  incapable  of  growing 
greater.  IVIoreover,  we  feel  some  quality  of 
necessity  about  the  proposition  "  two  and 
two  are  four,"  which  is  absent  from  even  the 
best  attested  empirical  generalisations.  Such 
generalisations  always  remain  mere  facts : 
we  feel  that  there  might  be  a  world  in  which 
they  were  false,  though  in  the  actual  world 
they  happen  to  be  true.  In  any  possible 
world,  on  the  contrary,  we  feel  that  two  and 
two  would  be  four  :  this  is  not  a  mere  fact, 
but  a  necessity  to  which  everything  actual 
and  possible  must  conform. 

The  case  may  be  made  clearer  by  con- 
sidering a  genuinely  empirical  generalisation, 
such  as  "  All  men  are  mortal."  It  is  plain  that 
we  believe  this  proposition,  in  the  first  place, 


122    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

because  there  is  no  known  instance  of  men 
living  beyond  a  certain  age,  and  in  the  second 
place  because  there  seem  to  be  physiological 
grounds  for  thinking  that  an  organism  such 
as  a  man's  body  must  sooner  or  later  wear 
out.     Neglecting    the    second    ground,    and 
considering  merely  our  experience  of  men's 
mortality,  it  is  plain  that  we  should  not  be 
content   with   one   quite   clearly   understood! 
instance  of  a  man  dying,  whereas,  in  the  case: 
of  "  two  and  two  are  four,"  one  instance  doeji 
suffice,  when  carefully  considered,  to  persuade 
us  that  the  same  must  happen  in  any  other 
instance.     Also  we  can  be  forced  to  admit,, 
on  reflection,  that  there  may  be  some  doubt, 
however  slight,  as  to  whether  all  men  are; 
mortal.     This   may   be   made   plain   by   the; 
attempt  to  imagine  two  different  worlds,  in 
one   of  which  there   are   men   who  are   not 
mortal,  while  in  the  other  two  and  two  make 
five.     When  Swift  invites  us  to  consider  the 
race  of   Struldbugs  who  never  die,   we  are 
able  to  acquiesce  in  imagination.     But  a  world 
where  two  and  two  make  five  seems  quite  on 
a  different  level.    We  feel  that  such  a  world,  if 


GENERAL  PRINCIPLES  123 

there  were  one,  would  upset  the  whole  fabric 
of  our  knowledge  and  reduce  us  to  utter  doubt. 
The  fact  is  that,  in  simple  mathematical 
judgments  such  as  "  two  and  two  are  four," 
and  also  in  many  judgments  of  logic,  we  can 
know  the  general  proposition  without  inferring 
it  from  instances,  although  some  instance  is 
usually  necessary  to  make  clear  to  us  what  the 
general  proposition  means.     This  is  why  there  \ 
is  real  utility  in  the  process  of  deduction,  which  " 
goes  from  the  general  to  the  general  or  from 
the  general  to  the  particular,  as  well  as  in  the  ' 
process  of  induction,  which  goes  from  the  par- 
ticular to  the  particular,  or  from  the  particular  f 
to  the  general.     It  is  an  old  debate  among 
philosophers   whether   deduction   ever   gives 
new  knowledge.     We   can  now  see  that  in 
certain  cases,  at  least,  it  does  do  so.     If  we 
already  know  that  two  and  two  always  make 
four,  and  we  know  that  Brown  and  Jones  are 
two,  and  so  are  Robinson  and  Smith,  we  can 
deduce  that  Brown  and  Jones  and  Robinson 
and  Smith  are  four.     This  is  new  knowledge, 
not  contained  in  our  premisses,  because  the 
general  proposition,  "  two  and  two  are  four," 


124    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

never  told  us  there  were  such  people  as  Brown 
and  Jones  and  Robinson  and  Smith,  and  the 
particular  premisses  did  not  tell  us  that  there 
were  four  of  them,  whereas  the  particular 
proposition  deduced  does  tell  us  both  these 
things. 

But  the  newness  of  the  knowledge  is  much 
less  certain  if  we  take  the  stock  instance  of 
deduction  that  is  always  given  in  books  on 
logic,  namely,  "  All  men  are  mortal ;  Socrates 
is  a  man,  therefore  Socrates  is  mortal." 
In  this  case,  what  we  really  know  beyond 
reasonable  doubt  is  that  certain  men,  A, 
B,  C,  were  mortal,  since,  in  fact,  they  have 
died.  If  Socrates  is  one  of  these  men,  it  is 
foiolish  to  go  the  roundabout  way  through 
*'  all  men  are  mortal  "  to  arrive  at  the  con- 
clusion that  probably  Socrates  is  mortal.  If 
Socrates  is  not  one  of  the  men  on  whom  our 
induction  is  based,  we  shall  still  do  better  to 
argue  straight  from  our  A,  B,  C,  to  Socrates, 
than  to  go  round  by  the  general  proposition, 
"  all  men  are  mortal."  For  the  probability 
that  Socrates  is  mortal  is  greater,  on  our  data, 
than  the  probability  that  all  men  are  mortal. 


GENERAL   PRINCIPLES  125 

(This  is  obvious,  because  if  all  men  are  mortal, 
so  is  Socrates  ;  but  if  Socrates  is  mortal,  it 
does  not  follow  that  all  men  are  mortal.) 
Hence  we  shall  reach  the  conclusion  that 
Socrates  is  mortal  with  a  greater  approach  to 
certainty  if  we  make  our  argument  purely 
inductive  than  if  we  go  by  way  of  "  all  men 
are  mortal  "  and  then  use  deduction. 

This  illustrates  the  difference  between 
general  propositions  known  a  priori,  such  as ' 
"  two  and  two  are  four,"  and  empirical 
generalisations  such  as  "  all  men  are  mortal." 
In  regard  to  the  former,  deduction  is  the 
right  mode  of  argument,  whereas  in  regard  to 
the  latter,  induction  is  always  theoretically 
preferable,  and  warrants  a  greater  confidence 
in  the  truth  of  our  conclusion,  because  all 
empirical  generalisations  are  more  uncertain 
than  the  instances  of  them. 

We  have  now  seen  that  there  are  proposi- 
tions known  a  priori,  and  that  among  them  are 
the  propositions  of  logic  and  pure  mathematics, 
as  well  as  the  fundamental  propositions  of 
ethics.  The  question  which  must  next  occupy 
us  is  this  :     How  is  it  possible  that  there 


126    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

should  be  such  knowledge  ?  And  more  par- 
ticularly, how  can  there  be  knowledge  of 
general  propositions  in  cases  where  we  have 
not  examined  all  the  instances,  and  indeed 
never  can  examine  them  all,  because  their 
number  is  infinite  ?  These  questions,  which 
were  first  brought  prominently  forward  by 
the  German  philosopher  Kant  (1724-1804), 
are  very  difficult,  and  historically  very  im- 
portant. 


CHAPTER  VIII 

HOW    A    PRIORI   KNOWLEDGE   IS   POSSIBLE 

Immanuel  Kant  is  generally  regarded  as 
the  greatest  of  the  modern  philosophers. 
Though  he  lived  through  the  Seven  Years' 
War  and  the  French  Revolution,  he  never 
interrupted  his  teaching  of  philosophy  at 
Konigsberg  in  East  Prussia.  His  most  dis- 
tinctive contribution  was  the  invention  of  what 
he  called  the  "  critical  "  philosophy,  which, 
assuming  as  a  datum  that  there  is  knowledge 
of  various  kinds,  inquired  how  such  know- 
ledge comes  to  be  possible,  and  deduced,  from 
the  answer  to  this  inquiry,  many  metaphy- 
sical results  as  to  the  nature  of  the  world. 
Whether  these  results  were  valid  may  well  be 
doubted.  But  Kant  undoubtedly  deserves 
credit  for  two  things  :  first,  for  having  per- 
ceived that  we  have  a  priori  knowledge  wluch 

127 


128    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

is  not  purely  "  analytic,"  i.e.  such  that 
the  opposite  would  be  self -contradictory ; 
and  secondly,  for  having  made  evident  the 
philosophical  importance  of  the  theory  of 
knowledge. 

Before  the  time  of  Kant,  it  was  generally 
held  that  whatever  knowledge  was  a  priori 
must  be  "  analytic.''  What  this  word  means 
will  be  best  illustrated  by  examples.  If  I 
say,  "  A  bald  man  is  a  man,"  "  A  plane  figure 
is  a  figure,"  "  A  bad  poet  is  a  poet,"  I  make 
a  purely  analytic  judgment :  the  subject 
spoken  about  is  given  as  having  at  least  two 
properties,  of  which  one  is  singled  out  to  be 
asserted  of  it.  Such  propositions  as  the  above 
are  trivial,  and  would  never  be  enunciated  in 
real  life  except  by  an  orator  preparing  the 
way  for  a  piece  of  sophistry.  They  are  called 
"  analytic  "  because  the  predicate  is  obtained 
by  merely  analysing  the  subject.  Before  the 
time  of  Kant  it  was  thought  that  all  judgments 
of  which  we  could  be  certain  a  priori  were 
of  this  kind :  that  in  all  of  them  there  was  a 
predicate  which  was  only  part  of  the  subject 
of  which  it  was  asserted.     If  this  were  so,  we 


A   PRIORI  KNOWLEDGE        129 

should  be  involved  in  a  definite  contra- 
diction if  we  attempted  to  deny  anything 
that  could  be  known  a  priori.  "  A  bald  man 
is  not  bald  "  would  assert  and  deny  baldness 
of  the  same  man,  and  would  therefore  con- 
tradict itself.  Thus  according  to  the  philo- 
sophers before  Kant,  the  law  of  contradiction, 
which  asserts  that  nothing  can  at  the  same 
time  have  and  not  have  a  certain  property, 
sufficed  to  establish  the  truth  of  all  a  priori 
knowledge. 

Hume  (1711-1776),  who  preceded  Kant, 
accepting  the  usual  view  as  to  what  makes 
knowledge  a  priori,  discovered  that,  in  many 
cases  which  had  previously  been  supposed 
analytic,  and  notably  in  the  case  of  cause  and 
effect,  the  connection  was  really  synthetic. 
Before  Hume,  rationalists  at  least  had 
supposed  that  the  effect  could  be  logically 
deduced  from  the  cause,  if  only  we  had 
sufficient  knowledge.  Hume  argued — cor- 
rectly, as  would  now  be  generally  admitted 
— that  this  could  not  be  done.  Hence  he 
inferred  the  far  more  doubtful  proposition 
that  nothing  could  be  known  a  priori  about 


130    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

the  connection  of  cause  and  effect.  Kant, 
who  had  been  educated  in  the  rationahst 
tradition,  was  much  perturbed  by  Hume's 
scepticism,  and  endeavoured  to  find  an  answer 
to  it.  He  perceived  that  not  only  the  con- 
nection of  cause  and  effect,  but  all  the  propo- 
sitions of  arithmetic  and  geometry,  are 
"  synthetic,"  i.e.  not  analytic  :  in  all  these 
propositions,  no  analysis  of  the  subject 
will  reveal  the  predicate.  His  stock  in- 
stance was  the  proposition  7  +  5  =  12. 
He  pointed  out,  quite  truly,  that  7  and  5 
have  to  be  put  together  to  give  12  :  the 
idea  of  12  is  not  contained  in  them,  nor 
even  in  the  idea  of  adding  them  together. 
Thus  he  was  led  to  the  conclusion  that  all 
pure  mathematics,  though  a  priori,  is  syn- 
thetic ;  and  this  conclusion  raised  a  new 
problem  of  which  he  endeavoured  to  find 
the  solution. 

The  question  which  Kant  put  at  the  be- 
ginning of  his  philosophy,  namely  "  How  is 
pure  mathematics  possible  ?  "  is  an  inter- 
esting and  difficult  one,  to  which  every  philo- 
sophy which  is  not  purely  sceptical  must  find 


A   PRIORI   KNOWLEDGE         131 

some  answer.  The  answer  of  the  pure 
empiricists,  that  our  mathematical  know- 
ledge is  derived  by  induction  from  particular 
instances,  we  have  already  seen  to  be  inade- 
quate, for  two  reasons  :  first,  that  the  validity 
of  the  inductive  principle  itself  cannot  be 
proved  by  induction ;  secondly,  that  the 
general  propositions  of  mathematics,  such  as 
"  two  and  two  always  make  four,"  can  obvi- 
ously be  known  with  certainty  by  considera- 
tion of  a  single  instance,  and  gain  nothing  by 
enumeration  of  other  cases  in  which  they 
have  been  found  to  be  true.  Thus  our 
knowledge  of  the  general  propositions  of 
mathematics  (and  the  same  applies  to 
logic)  must  be  accounted  for  otherwise  than 
our  (merely  probable)  knowledge  of  em- 
pirical generalisations  such  as  "  all  men  are 
mortal." 

The  problem  arises  through  the  fact  that 
such  knowledge  is  general,  whereas  all  ex- 
perience is  particular.  It  seems  strange  that 
we  should  apparently  be  able  to  know  some 
truths  in  advance  about  particular  things  of 
which  we  have  as  yet  no  experience  ;   but  it 


1S2     THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

cannot  easily  be  doubted  that  logic  and  arith- 
metic will  apply  to  such  things.  We  do  not 
know  who  will  be  the  inhabitants  of  London 
a  hundred  years  hence  ;  but  we  know  that 
any  two  of  them  and  any  other  two  of  them 
will  make  four  of  them.  This  apparent 
power  of  anticipating  facts  about  things  of 
which  we  have  no  experience  is  certainly 
surprising.  Kant's  solution  of  the  problem, 
though  not  valid  in  my  opinion,  is  interesting. 
It  is,  however,  very  difficult,  and  is  differently 
understood  by  different  philosophers.  We 
can,  therefore,  only  give  the  merest  outline 
of  it,  and  even  that  will  be  thought  mis- 
leading by  many  exponents  of  Kant's 
system. 

What  Kant  maintained  was  that  in  all  our 
experience  there  are  two  elements  to  be 
distinguished,  the  one  due  to  the  object 
{i.e.  to  what  we  have  called  the  "  physical 
object"),  the  other  due  to  our  own  nature. 
We  saw,  in  discussing  matter  and  sense- 
data,  that  the  physical  object  is  different 
from  the  associated  sense-data,  and  that 
the  sense-data  are  to  be  regarded  as  resulting 


A   PRIORI  KNOWLEDGE         1S3 

from  an  interaction  between  the  physical 
object  and  ourselves.  So  far,  we  are  in 
agreement  with  Kant.  But  what  is  distinc- 
tive  of  Kant  is  the  way  in  which  he  appor- 
tions the  shares  of  ourselves  and  the  physical 
object  respectively.  He  considers  that  the 
crude  material  given  in  sensation  —  the 
colour,  hardness,  etc. — is  due  to  the  object, 
and  that  what  we  supply  is  the  arrangement 
in  space  and  time,  and  all  the  relations  be- 
tween sense -data  which  result  from  com- 
parison or  from  considering  one  as  the  cause 
of  the  other  or  in  any  other  way.  His 
chief  reason  in  favour  of  this  view  is  that 
we  seem  to  have  a  'priori  knowledge  as  to 
space  and  time  and  causality  and  compari- 
son, but  not  as  to  the  actual  crude  material 
of  sensation.  We  can  be  sure,  he  says, 
that  anything  we  shall  ever  experience 
must  show  the  characteristics  affirmed  of  it 
in  our  a  priori  knowledge,  because  these 
characteristics  are  due  to  our  own  nature, 
and  therefore  nothing  can  ever  come  into 
our  experience  without  acquiring  these 
characteristic*. 


134    THE   PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

The  physical  object,  which  he  calls  the 
*' thing  in  itself,"  *  he  regards  as  essentially 
unknowable  ;  what  can  be  known  is  the  object 
as  we  have  it  in  experience,  which  he  calls 
the  "  phenomenon."  The  phenomenon,  be- 
ing a  joint  product  of  us  and  the  thing  in 
itself,  is  sure  to  have  those  characteristics 
which  are  due  to  us,  and  is  therefore  sure  to 
conform  to  our  a  priori  knowledge.  Hence 
this  knowledge,  though  true  of  all  actual  and 
possible  experience,  must  not  be  supposed 
to  apply  outside  experience.  Thus  in  spite 
of  the  existence  of  a  priori  knowledge,  we 
cannot  know  anything  about  the  thing  in 
itself  or  about  what  is  not  an  actual  or  possible 
object  of  experience.  In  this  way  he  tries  to 
reconcile  and  harmonise  the  contentions  of 
the  rationalists  with  the  arguments  of  the 
empiricists. 

Apart     from     minor    grounds    on     which 

Kant's  philosophy  may  be  criticised,  there  is 

*  Kant's  "  thing  in  itself  "  is  identical  in  definition 
with  the  physical  object,  namely,  it  is  the  cause  of  sensa- 
tion. In  the  properties  deduced  from  the  definition  it  is 
not  identical,  since  Kant  held  (in  spite  of  some  inconsist- 
ency as  regards  cause)  that  we  can  know  that  none  of  the 
categories  are  applicable  to  the  "  thing  in  itself." 


A  PRIORI  KNOWLEDGE         135 

one  main  objection  which  seems  fatal  to  any 
attempt  to  deal  with  the  problem  of  a  priori 
knowledge  by  his  method.  The  thing  to  be 
accounted  for  is  our  certainty  that  the  facts 
must  always  conform  to  logic  and  arithmetic. 
To  say  that  logic  and  arithmetic  are  contri- 
buted by  us  does  not  account  for  this.  Our 
nature  is  as  much  a  fact  of  the  existing  world 
as  anything,  and  there  can  be  no  certainty 
that  it  will  remain  constant .  It  might  happen, 
if  Kant  is  right,  that  to-morrow  our  nature 
would  so  change  as  to  make  two  and  two 
become  five.  This  possibility  seems  never 
to  have  occurred  to  him,  yet  it  is  one  which 
utterly  destroys  the  certainty  and  univer- 
sality which  he  is  anxious  to  vindicate  for 
arithmetical  propositions.  It  is  true  that  this 
possibility,  formally,  is  inconsistent  with  the 
Kantian  view  that  time  itself  is  a  form 
imposed  by  the  subject  upon  phenomena, 
so  that  our  real  Self  is  not  in  time  and  has 
no  to-morrow.  But  he  will  still  have  to 
suppose  that  the  time-order  of  phenomena 
is  determined  by  characteristics  of  what  is 
behind  phenomena,  and  this  suffices  for  the 
substance  of  our  argument. 


186    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

Reflection,  moreover,  seems  to  make  it  clear 
that,  if  there  is  any  truth  in  our  arithmetical 
beliefs,  they  must  apply  to  things  equally 
whether  we  think  of  them  or  not.  Two 
physical  objects  and  two  other  physical 
objects  must  make  four  physical  objects,  even 
if  physical  objects  cannot  be  experienced. 
To  assert  this  is  certainly  within  the  scope 
of  what  we  mean  when  we  state  that  two  and 
two  are  four.  Its  truth  is  just  as  indubitable 
as  the  truth  of  the  assertion  that  two 
phenomena  and  two  other  phenomena  make 
four  phenomena.  Thus  Kant's  solution  un- 
duly limits  the  scope  of  a  priori  propositions, 
in  addition  to  failing  in  the  attempt  at  ex- 
plaining their  certainty. 

Apart  from  the  special  doctrines  advocated 
by  Kant,  it  is  very  common  among  philo- 
sophers to  regard  what  is  a  priori  as  in  some 
sense  mental,  as  concerned  rather  with  the 
way  we  must  think  than  with  any  fact  of  the 
outer  world.  We  noted  in  the  preceding 
chapter  the  three  principles  commonly  called 
*'  laws  of  thought."  The  view  which  led  to 
their  being  so  named  is  a  natural  one,  but 


A   PRIORI  KNOWLEDGE         137 

there  are  strong  reasons  for  thinking  that  it 
is  erroneous.  Let  us  take  as  an  illustra- 
tion the  law  of  contradiction.  This  is 
commonly  stated  in  the  form  "  Nothing 
can  both  be  and  not  be,"  which  is  intended 
to  express  the  fact  that  nothing  can  at  once 
have  and  not  have  a  given  quality.  Thus, 
for  example,  if  a  tree  is  a  beech  it  cannot 
also  be  not  a  beech  ;  if  my  table  is  rectan- 
gular it  cannot  also  be  not  rectangular,  and 
so  on. 

Now  what  makes  it  natural  to  call  this 
principle  a  law  of  thought  is  that  it  is  by 
thought  rather  than  by  outward  observation 
that  we  persuade  ourselves  of  its  necessary 
truth.  When  we  have  seen  that  a  tree  is  a 
beech,  we  do  not  need  to  look  again  in  order 
to  ascertain  whether  it  is  also  not  a  beech ; 
thought  alone  makes  us  know  that  this  is 
impossible.  But  the  conclusion  that  the  law 
of  contradiction  is  a  law  of  thought  is  never- 
theless erroneous.  What  we  believe,  when 
we  believe  the  law  of  contradiction,  is  not 
that  the  mind  is  so  made  that  it  must  believe 
the  law  of  contradiction.     This  belief  is  a 


188     THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

subsequent  result  of  psychological  reflection, 
which  presupposes  the  belief  in  the  law  of 
contradiction.  The  belief  in  the  law  of 
contradiction  is  a  belief  about  things,  not 
only  about  thoughts.  It  is  not,  e.g.,  the 
belief  that  if  we  think  a  certain  tree  is  a 
beech,  we  cannot  at  the  same  time  think 
that  it  is  not  a  beech ;  it  is  the  belief 
that  if  the  tree  is  a  beech,  it  cannot  at 
the  same  time  be  not  a  beech.  Thus  the 
law  of  contradiction  is  about  things,  and  not 
merely  about  thoughts  ;  and  although  belief 
in  the  law  of  contradiction  is  a  thought,  the 
law  of  contradiction  itself  is  not  a  thought, 
but  a  fact  concerning  the  things  in  the  world. 
If  this,  which  we  believe  when  we  believe  the 
law  of  contradiction,  were  not  true  of  the 
things  in  the  world,  the  fact  that  we  were 
compelled  to  think  it  true  would  not  save 
the  law  of  contradiction  from  being  false  ; 
and  this  shows  that  the  law  is  not  a  law  of 
thought. 

A  similar  argument  applies  to  any  other 
a  priori  judgment.  When  we  judge  that 
two  and  two  are  four,  we  are  not  making  a 


A  PRIORI   KNOWLEDGE         139 

judgment  about  our  thoughts,  but  about  all 
actual  or  possible  couples.  The  fact  that 
our  minds  are  so  constituted  as  to  believe 
that  two  and  two  are  four,  though  it  is  true, 
is  emphatically  not  what  we  assert  when  we 
assert  that  two  and  two  are  four.  And  no 
fact  about  the  constitution  of  our  minds 
could  make  it  true  that  two  and  two  are 
four.  Thus  our  a  priori  knowledge,  if  it 
is  not  erroneous,  is  not  merely  knowledge 
about  the  constitution  of  our  minds,  but 
is  applicable  to  whatever  the  world  may 
contain,  both  what  is  mental  and  what  is 
non-mental. 

The  fact  seems  to  be  that  all  our  a  priori 
knowledge  is  concerned  with  entities  which 
do  not,  properly  speaking,  exist,  either  in  the 
mental  or  in  the  physical  world.  These  en- 
tities are  such  as  can  be  named  by  parts  of 
speech  which  are  not  substantives  ;  they  are 
such  entities  as  qualities  and  relations.  Sup- 
pose, for  instance,  that  I  am  in  my  room.  I 
exist,  and  my  room  exists  ;  but  does  "  in  " 
exist  ?  Yet  obviously  the  word  "  in  "  has 
a  meaning  ;   it  denotes  a  relation  which  holds 


140    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

between  me  and  my  room.  This  relation  is 
something,  although  we  cannot  say  that  it 
exists  in  the  same  sense  in  which  I  and  my 
room  exist.  The  relation  "  in  "  is  something 
which  we  can  think  about  and  understand, 
for,  if  we  could  not  understand  it,  we  could 
not  understand  the  sentence  "  I  am  in  my 
room."  Many  philosophers,  following  Kant, 
have  maintained  that  relations  are  the  work 
of  the  mind,  that  things  in  themselves  have 
no  relations,  but  that  the  mind  brings  them 
together  in  one  act  of  thought  and  thus  pro- 
duces the  relations  which  it  judges  them  to 
have. 

This  view,  however,  seems  open  to  objec- 
tions similar  to  those  which  we  urged  before 
against  Kant.  It  seems  plain  that  it  is  not 
thought  which  produces  the  truth  of  the 
proposition  "  I  am  in  my  room."  It  may  be 
true  that  an  earwig  is  in  my  room,  even  if 
neither  I  nor  the  earwig  nor  any  one  else  is 
aware  of  this  truth  ;  for  this  truth  concerns 
only  the  earwig  and  the  room,  and  does  not 
depend  upon  anything  else.  Thus  relations, 
as  we  shall  tee  more  fully  in  the  next  chapter. 


A   PRIORI  KNOWLEDGE         141 

must  be  placed  in  a  world  which  i«  neither 
mental  nor  physical.  This  world  is  of  great 
importance  to  philosophy,  and  in  particular 
to  the  problems  of  a  priori  knowledge.  In  the 
next  chapter  we  shall  proceed  to  develop  its 
nature  and  its  bearing  upon  the  questions 
with  which  we  have  been  dealing. 


CHAPTER  IX 

THE   WORLD  OF  UNIVERSALS 

At  the  end  of  the  preceding  chapter  we  saw 
that  such  entities  as  relations  appear  to  have 
a  being  which  is  in  some  way  different  from 
that  of  physical  objects,  and  also  different 
from  that  of  minds  and  from  that  of  sense- 
data.  In  the  present  chapter  we  have  to 
consider  what  is  the  nature  of  this  kind  of 
being,  and  also  what  objects  there  are  that 
have  this  kind  of  being.  We  will  begin  with 
the  latter  question. 

The  problem  with  which  we  are  now  con- 
cerned is  a  very  old  one,  since  it  was  brought 
into  philosophy  by  Plato.  Plato's  "  theory 
of  ideas  "  is  an  attempt  to  solve  this  very 
problem,  and  in  my  opinion  it  is  one  of  the 
most  successful  attempts  hitherto  made.  The 
theory  to  be  advocated  in  what  follows  is 

142 


THE  WORLD   OF   UNIVERSALS      143 

largely  Plato's,  with  merely  such  modifica- 
tions as  time  has  shown  to  be  necessary. 

The  way  the  problem  arose  for  Plato  was 
more  or  less  as  follows.  Let  us  consider,  say, 
such  a  notion  as  justice.  If  we  ask  ourselves 
what  justice  is,  it  is  natural  to  proceed  by 
considering  this,  that,  and  the  other  just  act, 
with  a  view  to  discovering  what  they  have  in 
common.  They  must  all,  in  some  sense, 
partake  of  a  common  nature,  which  will  be 
found  in  whatever  is  just  and  in  nothing  else. 
This  common  nature,  in  virtue  of  which 
they  are  all  just,  will  be  justice  itself,  the  pure 
essence  the  admixture  of  which  with  facts  of 
ordinary  life  produces  the  multiplicity  of  just 
acts.  Similarly  with  any  other  word  which 
may  be  applicable  to  common  facts,  such  as 
"  whiteness  "  for  example.  The  word  will  be 
applicable  to  a  number  of  particular  things 
because  they  all  participate  in  a  common 
nature  or  essence.  This  pure  essence  is  what 
Plato  calls  an  ""  idea  "  or  "  form."  (It  must 
not  be  supposed  that  "  ideas,"  in  his  sense, 
exist  in  minds,  though  they  may  be  appre- 
hended by  minds.)     The  "  idea  "  justice  is  not 


144    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

identical  with  anything  that  is  just :  it  is  some- 
thing other  than  particular  things,  which 
particular  things  partake  of.  Not  being 
particular,  it  cannot  itself  exist  in  the  world 
of  sense.  Moreover  it  is  not  fleeting  or 
changeable  like  the  things  of  sense  :  it  is 
eternally  itself,  immutable  and  indestructible. 
Thus  Plato  is  led  to  a  supra-sensible  world, 
more  real  than  the  common  world  of  sense, 
the  unchangeable  world  of  ideas,  which  alone 
gives  to  the  world  of  sense  whatever  pale 
reflection  of  reality  may  belong  to  it.  The 
truly  real  world,  for  Plato,  is  the  world  of 
ideas  ;  for  whatever  we  may  attempt  to  say 
about  things  in  the  world  of  sense,  we  can 
only  succeed  in  saying  that  they  participate 
in  such  and  such  ideas,  which,  therefore, 
constitute  all  their  character.  Hence  it  is 
easy  to  pass  on  into  a  mysticism.  We  may 
hope,  in  a  mystic  illumination,  to  see  the  ideas 
as  we  see  objects  ot  sense  ;  and  we  may 
imagine  that  the  ideas  exist  in  heaven. 
These  mystical  developments  are  very  natural, 
but  the  basis  of  the  theory  is  in  logic,  and  it  is 
as  based  in  logic  that  we  have  to  consider  it. 


THE  WORLD  OF  UNIVERSALS    145 

The  word  *'  idea "  has  acquired,  in  the 
course  of  time,  many  associations  which  are 
quite  misleading  when  applied  to  Plato's 
"  ideas."  We  shall  therefore  use  the  word 
"universal"  instead  of  the  word  "idea,"  to 
describe  what  Plato  meant.  The  essence  of 
the  sort  of  entity  that  Plato  meant  is  that  it 
is  opposed  to  the  particular  things  that  are 
given  in  sensation.  We  speak  of  whatever 
is  given  in  sensation,  or  is  of  the  same  nature 
as  things  given  in  sensation,  as  a  particular ; 
by  opposition  to  this,  a  universal  will  be  any- 
thing which  may  be  shared  by  many  parti- 
culars, and  has  those  characteristics  which, 
as  we  saw,  distinguish  justice  and  whiteness 
from  just  acts  and  white  things. 

When   we    examine    common    words,    we , 
find  that,   broadly   speaking,   proper   names ; 
stand    for     particulars,     while     other     sub- 
stantives,  adjectives,  prepositions,  and  verbs  ' 
stand  for   universals.     Pronouns    stand    for  • 
particulars,  but  are  ambiguous  :   it  is   only 
by   the   context   or  the   circumstances  that 
we  know   what  particulars  they   stand   for. 
The  word   "  now  "  stands  for  a  particular. 


146    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

namely  the  present  moment ;  but  like  pro- 
nouns, it  stands  for  an  ambiguous  particular, 
because  the  present  is  always  changing. 

It  will  be  seen  that  no  sentence  can  be 
made  up  without  at  least  one  word  which 
denotes  a  universal.  The  nearest  approach 
would  be  some  such  statement  as  "  I  like 
this."  But  even  here  the  word  "  like  "  de- 
notes a  universal,  for  I  may  like  other  things, 

■  and  other  people  may  like  things.  Thus  all 
truths  involve  universals,  and  all  knowledge 
of   truths   involves   acquaintance   with   uni- 

1-  versals. 

Seeing  that  nearly  all  the  words  to  be 
found  in  the  dictionary  stand  for  universals, 
it  is  strange  that  hardly  anybody  except 
students  of  philosophy  ever  realises  that  there 
are  such  entities  as  universals.  We  do  not 
naturally  dwell  upon  those  words  in  a  sentence 
which  do  not  stand  for  particulars  ;  and  if  we 
are  forced  to  dwell  upon  a  word  which  stands 
for  a  universal,  we  naturally  think  of  it  as 
standing  for  some  one  of  the  particulars  that 
come  under  the  universal.  When,  for  example, 
we  hear  the  sentence,  "  Charles  I.'s  head  was 


THE  WORLD  OF  UNIVERSALS     147 

cut  off,"  we  may  naturally  enough  think  of 
Charles  I.,  of  Charles  I.'s  head,  and  of  the 
operation  of  cutting  off  his  head,  which  are  all 
particulars  ;  but  we  do  not  naturally  dwell 
upon  what  is  meant  by  the  word  "  head  "  or 
the  word  "  cut,"  which  is  a  universal.  We 
feel  such  words  to  be  incomplete  and  insub- 
stantial ;  they  seem  to  demand  a  context 
before  anything  can  be  done  with  them. 
Hence  we  succeed  in  avoiding  all  notice  of 
universals  as  such,  until  the  study  of  philo- 
sophy forces  them  upon  our  attention. 

Even  among  philosophers,  we  may  say, 
broadly,  that  only  those  universals  which  are 
named  by  adjectives  or  substantives  have  been 
much  or  often  recognised,  while  those  named 
by  verbs  and  prepositions  have  been  usually 
overlooked.  This  omission  has  had  a  very 
great  effect  upon  philosophy  ;  it  is  hardly 
too  much  to  say  that  most  metaphysics,  since 
Spinoza,  has  been  largely  determined  by  it. 
The  way  this  has  occurred  is,  in  outline,  as 
follows  :  Speaking  generally,  adjectives  and 
common  nouns  express  qualities  or  properties 
of   single   things,   whereas   prepositions   and 


148     THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

verbs  tend  to  express  relations  between  two 
or  more  things.  Thus  the  neglect  of  pre- 
positions and  verbs  led  to  the  belief  that 
every  proposition  can  be  regarded  as  attri- 
buting a  property  to  a  single  thing,  rather 
than  as  expressing  a  relation  between  two  or 
more  things.  Hence  it  was  supposed  that, 
ultimately,  there  can  be  no  such  entities  as 
relations  between  things.  Hence  either  there 
can  be  only  one  thing  in  the  universe,  or,  if 
there  are  many  things,  they  cannot  possibly 
interact  in  any  way,  since  any  interaction 
would  be  a  relation,  and  relations  are  im- 
possible. 

The  first  of  these  views,  which  was  advo- 
cated by  Spinoza,  and  is  held  in  our  own  day 
by  Mr.  Bradley  and  many  other  philosophers, 
is  called  monism ;  the  second,  which  was 
advocated  by  Leibniz,  but  is  not  very  common 
nowadays,  is  called  monadism,  because  each 
of  the  isolated  things  is  called  a  monad.  Both 
these  opposing  philosophies,  interesting  as 
they  are,  result,  in  my  opinion,  from  an  undue 
attention  to  one  sort  of  universals,  namely  the 
sort  represented  by  adjectives  and  substan- 


THE   WORLD   OF  UNI  VERS  ALS    149 

tives    rather    than    by    verbs   and    prepoji- 
tions. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  if  any  one  were  anxious 
to  deny  altogether  that  there  are  such  things 
as  universals,  we  should  find  that  we  cannot 
strictly  prove  that  there  are  such  entities  as 
qualities,  i.e.  the  universals  represented  by 
adjectives  and  substantives,  whereas  we  can 
prove  that  there  must  be  relations,  i.e.  the 
sort  of  universals  generally  represented  by 
verbs  and  prepositions.  Let  us  take  in  illus- 
tration the  universal  whiteness.  If  we  believe 
that  there  is  such  a  universal,  we  shall  say 
that  things  are  white  because  they  have  the 
quality  of  whiteness.  This  view,  however, 
was  strenuously  denied  by  Berkeley  and 
Hume,  who  have  been  followed  in  this  by 
later  empiricists.  The  form  which  their 
denial  took  was  to  deny  that  there  are  such 
things  as  "  abstract  ideas."  When  we  want 
to  think  of  whiteness,  they  said,  we  form  an 
image  of  some  particular  white  thing,  and 
reason  concerning  this  particular,  taking  care 
not  to  deduce  anything  concerning  it  which 
we  cannot  see  to  be  equally  true  of  any  other 


150    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

white  thing.  As  an  account  of  our  actual 
mental  processes,  this  is  no  doubt  largely 
true.  In  geometry,  for  example,  when  we 
wash  to  prove  something  about  all  triangles, 
we  draw  a  particular  triangle  and  reason  about 
it,  taking  care  not  to  use  any  characteristic 
which  it  does  not  share  with  other  triangles. 
The  beginner,  in  order  to  avoid  error,  often 
finds  it  useful  to  draw  several  triangles,  as 
unlike  each  other  as  possible,  in  order  to 
make  sure  that  his  reasoning  is  equally  applic- 
able to  all  of  them.  But  a  difficulty  emerges 
as  soon  as  we  ask  ourselves  how  we  know 
that  a  thing  is  white  or  a  triangle.  If  we 
wish  to  avoid  the  universals  whiteness  and 
triangularity,  we  shall  choose  some  particular 
patch  of  white  or  some  particular  triangle, 
and  say  that  anything  is  white  or  a  triangle 
if  it  has  the  right  sort  of  resemblance  to  our 
chosen  particular.  But  then  the  resemblance 
required  will  have  to  be  a  universal.  Since 
there  are  many  white  things,  the  resemblance 
must  hold  between  many  pairs  of  particular 
white  things  ;  and  this  is  the  characteristic 
of  a  universal.     It  will  be  useless  to  say  that 


THE   WORLD   OF   UNIVERSALS     151 

there  is  a  different  resemblance  for  each 
pair,  for  then  we  shall  have  to  say  that  these 
resemblances  resemble  each  other,  and  thus 
at  last  we  shall  be  forced  to  admit  resem- 
blance as  a  universal.  The  relation  of  re- 
semblance, therefore,  must  be  a  true  universal. 
And  having  been  forced  to  admit  this  uni- 
versal, we  find  that  it  is  no  longer  worth 
while  to  invent  difficult  and  unplausible 
theories  to  avoid  the  admission  of  such 
universals  as  whiteness  and  triangularity. 

Berkeley  and  Hume  failed  to  perceive 
this  refutation  of  their  rejection  of  "  abstract 
ideas,"  because,  like  their  adversaries,  they 
only  thought  of  qualities,  and  altogether 
ignored  relations  as  universals.  We  have 
therefore  here  another  respect  in  which  the 
rationalists  appear  to  have  been  in  the  right 
as  against  the  empiricists,  although,  owing 
to  the  neglect  or  denial  of  relations,  the 
deductions  made  by  rationalists  were,  if  any- 
thing, more  apt  to  be  mistaken  than  those 
made  by  empiricists. 

Having  now  seen  that  there  must  be  such 
entities  as  universals,  the  next  point  to  be 


152    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

proved  is  that  their  being  is  not  merely  mental. 
By  this  is  meant  that  whatever  being  belongs 
to  them  is  independent  of  their  being  thought 
of  or  or  in  any  way  apprehended  by  minds. 
We  have  already  touched  on  this  subject  at 
the  end  of  the  preceding  chapter,  but  we 
must  now  consider  more  fully  what  sort  of 
being  it  is  that  belongs  to  universals. 

Consider  such  a  proposition  as  "  Edinburgh 
is  north  of  London."  Here  we  have  a  re- 
lation between  two  places,  and  it  seems  plain 
that  the  relation  subsists  independently  of 
our  knowledge  of  it.  When  we  come  to  know 
that  Edinburgh  is  north  of  London,  we  come 
to  know  something  which  has  to  do  only  with 
Edinburgh  and  London  :  we  do  not  cause  the 
truth  of  the  proposition  by  coming  to  know 
it,  on  the  contrary  we  merely  apprehend  a 
fact  which  was  there  before  we  knew  it.  The 
part  of  the  earth's  surface  where  Edinburgh 
stands  would  be  north  of  the  part  where 
London  stands,  even  if  there  were  no  human 
being  to  know  about  north  and  south,  and 
even  if  there  were  no  minds  at  all  in  the 
universe.     This  is,  of  course,  denied  by  many 


THE  WORLD   OF  UNIVERSALS     153 

philosophers,  either  for  Berkeley's  reasons 
or  for  Kant's.  Cut  we  have  already  con- 
sidered these  reasons,  nd  decided  that  they 
are  inadequate.  We  may  therefore  now 
assume  it  to  be  true  that  nothing  mental  is 
presupposed  in  the  fact  that  Edinburgh  is 
north  of  London.  But  this  fact  involves  the 
relation  "  north  of,"  which  is  a  universal ; 
and  it  would  be  impossible  for  the  whole  fact  to 
involve  nothing  mental  if  the  relation  "  north 
of,"  which  is  a  constituent  part  of  the  fact, 
did  involve  anything  mental.  Hence  we 
must  admit  that  the  relation,  like  the  terms 
it  relates,  is  not  dependent  upon  thought,  but 
belongs  to  the  independent  world  which 
thought  apprehends  but  does  not  create. 

This  conclusion,  however,  is  met  by  the 
difficulty  that  the  relation  "  north  of  "  does 
not  seem  to  exist  in  the  same  sense  in  which 
Edinburgh  and  London  exist.  If  we  ask 
"  Where  and  when  does  this  relation  exist  ?  " 
the  answer  must  be  "  Nowhere  and  no  when." 
There  is  no  place  or  time  where  we  can  find 
the  relation  "  north  of."  It  does  not  exist  in 
Edinburgh  any  more  than  in  London,  for  it 


154    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

relates  the  two  and  is  neutral  as  between 
them.  Nor  can  we  say  that  it  exists  at  any 
(particular  time.  Now  everything  that  can 
be  apprehended  by  the  senses  or  by  intro- 
:spection  exists  at  some  particular  time. 
Hence  the  relation  "  north  of  "  is  radically 
different  from  such  things.  It  is  neither 
in  space  nor  in  time,  neither  material  nor 
mental  ;   yet  it  is  something. 

It  is  largely  the  very  peculiar  kind  of 
being  that  belongs  to  universals  which  has  led 
many  people  to  suppose  that  they  are  really 
mental.  We  can  think  of  a  universal,  and  our 
thinking  then  exists  in  a  perfectly  ordinary 
sense,  like  any  other  mental  act.  Suppose,  for 
example,  that  we  are  thinking  of  whiteness. 
Then  in  one  sense  it  may  be  said  that  white- 
ness is  "  in  our  mind."  We  have  here  the 
same  ambiguity  as  we  noted  in  discussing 
Berkeley  in  Chapter  IV.  In  the  strict  sense, 
it  is  not  whiteness  that  is  in  our  mind,  but  the 
act  of  thinking  of  whiteness.  The  connected 
ambiguity  in  the  word  "  idea,"  which  we 
noted  at  the  same  time,  also  causes  confusion 
here.     In  one  sense  of  this  word,  namely  the 


THE  WORLD  OF  UNIVERSALS     155 

sense  in  which  it  denotes  the  object  of  an  act 
of  thought,  whiteness  is  an  "  idea."  Hence, 
if  the  ambiguity  is  not  guarded  against,  we 
may  come  to  think  that  whiteness  is  an 
"  idea  "  in  the  other  sense,  i.e.  an  act  of 
thought  ;  and  thus  we  come  to  think  that 
whiteness  is  mental.  But  in  so  thinking,  we 
rob  it  of  its  essential  quality  of  universality. 
One  man's  act  of  thought  is  necessarily  a 
different  thing  from  another  man's ;  one 
man's  act  of  thought  at  one  time  is  neces- 
sarily a  different  thing  from  the  same  man's 
act  of  thought  at  another  time.  Hence,  if 
whiteness  were  the  thought  as  opposed  to  its 
object,  no  two  different  men  could  think  of  it, 
and  no  one  man  could  think  of  it  twice. 
That  which  many  different  thoughts  of  white- 
ness have  in  common  is  their  object,  and  this 
object  is  different  from  all  of  them.  Thus 
universals  are  not  thoughts,  though  when 
known  they  are  the  objects  of  thoughts. 

We  shall  find  it  convenient  only  to  speak 
of  things  existing  when  they  are  in  time,  that 
is  to  say,  when  we  can  point  to  some  time  ai 
which  they  exist  (not  excluding  the  possi- 


156    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

bility  of  their  existing  at  all  times).  Thus* 
thoughts  and  feelings,  minds  and  physical 
objects  exist.  But  universals  do  not  exist 
in  this  sense  ;  we  shall  say  that  they  subsist 
or  have  being,  where  "  being  "  is  opposed  to 
*'  existence  "  as  being  timeless.  The  world 
of  universals,  therefore,  may  also  be  described 
as  the  world  of  being.  The  world  of  being 
is  unchangeable,  rigid,  exact,  delightful  to 
the  mathematician,  the  logician,  the  builder 
of  metaphysical  systems,  and  all  who  love 
perfection  more  than  life.  The  world  of 
existence  is  fleeting,  vague,  without  sharp 
boundaries,  without  any  clear  plan  or  arrange- 
ment, but  it  contains  all  thoughts  and  feelings, 
all  the  data  of  sense,  and  all  physical  objects, 
everything  that  can  do  either  good  or  harm, 
everything  that  makes  any  difference  to  the 
value  of  life  and  the  world.  According  to 
our  temperaments,  we  shall  prefer  the  con- 
templation of  the  one  or  of  the  other.  The 
one  we  do  not  prefer  will  probably  seem  to  us 
a  pale  shadow  of  the  one  we  prefer,  and  hardly 
worthy  to  be  regarded  as  in  any  sense  real. 
But  the  truth  is  that  both  have  the  same 


THE  WORLD   OF  UNIVERSALS     157 

cairn  on  our  impartial  attention,  both  are 
real,  and  both  are  important  to  the  meta- 
physician. Indeed  no  sooner  have  we  dis- 
tinguished the  two  worlds  than  it  becomes 
necessary  to  consider  their  relations. 

But  first  of  all  we  must  examine  our 
knowledge  of  universals.  This  consideration 
will  occupy  us  in  the  following  chapter, 
where  we  shall  find  that  it  solves  the  problem 
of  a  priori  knowledge,  from  which  we  were 
first  led  to  consider  universals. 


CHAPTER  X 

ON   OUR   KNOWLEDGE  OF  UNIVERSALS 

In  regard  to  one  man's  knowledge  at  a 
given  time,  universals,  like  particulars,  may 
be  divided  into  those  known  by  acquaintance, 
those  known  only  by  description,  and  those 
not  known  either  by  acquaintance  or  by  de- 
scription. 

Let  us  consider  first  the  knowledge  of 
universals  by  acquaintance.  It  is  obvious, 
to  begin  with,  that  we  are  acquainted  with 
such  universals  as  white,  red,  black,  SAveet, 
sour,  loud,  hard,  etc.,  i.e.  with  qualities 
which  are  exemplified  in  sense-data.  When 
we  see  a  white  patch,  we  are  acquainted, 
in  the  first  instance,  with  the  particular 
patch  ;  but  by  seeing  many  white  patches, 
we  easily  learn  to  abstract  the  whiteness 
which  they   all   have   in   common,    and    in 

158 


ON  KNOWLEDGE  OF  UNIVERSALS    159 

learning  to  do  this  we  are  learning  to  be 
acquainted  with  whiteness.  A  similar  pro- 
cess will  make  us  acquainted  with  any 
other  universal  of  the  same  sort,  Universals 
of  this  sort  may  be  called  "  sensible  quali- 
ties." They  can  be  apprehended  with  less 
effort  of  abstraction  than  any  others,  and 
they  seem  less  removed  from  particulars 
than  other  universals  are. 

We  come  next  to  relations.  The  easiest 
relations  to  apprehend  are  those  which  hold 
between  the  different  parts  of  a  single  complex 
sense-datum.  For  example,  I  can  see  at  a 
glance  the  whole  of  the  page  on  which  I  am 
writing ;  thus  the  whole  page  is  included  in 
one  sense-datum.  But  I  perceive  that  some 
parts  of  the  page  are  to  the  left  of  other  parts, 
and  some  parts  are  above  other  parts.  The 
process  of  abstraction  in  this  case  seems  to 
proceed  somewhat  as  follows  :  I  see  success- 
ively a  number  of  sense-data  in  which  one 
part  is  to  the  left  of  another  ;  I  perceive,  as  in 
the  case  of  different  white  patches,  that  all 
these  sense-data  have  something  in  com- 
mon, and  by  abstraction  I  find  that  what 


ICO    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

they  have  in  common  is  a  certain  relation 
between  their  parts,  namely  the  relation 
which  I  call  "  being  to  the  left  of."  In 
this  way  I  become  acquainted  with  the 
universal  relation. 

In  like  manner  I  become  aware  of  the 
relation  of  before  and  after  in  time.  Suppose 
I  hear  a  chime  of  bells  :  when  the  last  bell  of 
the  chime  sounds,  I  can  retain  the  whole 
chime  before  my  mind,  and  I  can  perceive 
that  the  earlier  bells  came  before  the  later 
ones.  Also  in  memory  I  perceive  that 
what  I  am  remembering  came  before  the 
present  time.  From  either  of  these  sources 
I  can  abstract  the  universal  relation  of  be- 
fore and  after,  just  as  I  abstracted  the 
universal  relation  "being  to  the  left  of." 
Thus  time  -  relations,  like  space  -  relations, 
are  among  those  with  which  we  are  ac- 
quainted. 

Another  relation  with  which  we  become 
acquainted  in  much  the  same  way  is  resem- 
blance. If  I  see  simultaneously  two  shades 
of  green,  I  can  see  that  they  resemble  each 
other  ;  if  I  also  see  a  shade  of  red  at  the  same 


ON  KNOWLEDGE  OF  UNIVERSALS    161 

time,  I  can  see  that  the  two  greens  have 
more  resemblance  to  each  other  than  either 
has  to  the  red.  In  this  way  I  become 
acquainted  with  the  universal  resemblance  or 
similarity. 

Between  universals,  as  between  parti- 
culars, there  are  relations  of  which  we  may  be 
immediately  aware.  We  have  just  seen  that 
we  can  perceive  that  the  resemblance  between 
two  shades  of  green  is  greater  than  the  re- 
semblance between  a  shade  of  red  and  a  shade 
of  green.  Here  we  are  dealing  with  a  relation, 
namely  "  greater  than,"  between  two  re- 
lations. Our  knowledge  of  such  relations, 
though  it  requires  more  power  of  abstraction 
than  is  required  for  perceiving  the  qualities 
of  sense-data,  appears  to  be  equally  immediate, 
and  (at  least  in  some  cases)  equally  indubit- 
able. Thus  there  is  immediate  knowledge 
concerning  universals  as  well  as  concerning 
sense-data. 

Returning  now  to  the  problem  of  a  priori 
knowledge,  which  we  left  unsolved  when  we 
began  the  consideration  of  universals,  we  find 
ourselves  in  a  position  to  deal  with  it  in  a 

F 


162    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

much  more  satisfactory  manner  than  was 
possible  before.  Let  us  revert  to  the  pro- 
position "  two  and  two  are  four."  It  is 
fairly  obvious,  in  view  of  what  has  been 
said,  that  this  proposition  states  a  relation 
between  the  universal  "  two "  and  the  uni- 
versal "four."  This  suggests  a  proposition 
which  we  shall  now  endeavour  to  esta- 
blish ;  namely,  All  a  priori  knowledge  deals 
exclusively  with  the  relations  of  universals. 
This  proposition  is  of  great  importance, 
and  goes  a  long  way  towards  solving  our 
previous  difficulties  concerning  a  priori  know- 
ledge. 

The  only  case  in  which  it  might  seem,  at 
first  sight,  as  if  our  proposition  were  untrue, 
is  the  case  in  which  an  a  priori  proposition 
states  that  all  of  one  class  of  particulars 
belong  to  some  other  class,  or  (what  comes  to 
the  same  thing)  that  all  particulars  having 
some  one  property  also  have  some  other.  In 
this  case  it  might  seem  as  though  we  were 
dealing  with  the  particulars  that  have  the 
property  rather  than  with  the  property.  The 
proposition  "  two  and  tv»o  are  four  "  is  really 


ON  KNOWLEDGE  OF  UNIVERSALS     163 

a  case  in  point,  for  this  may  be  stated  in  the 
form  "  any  two  and  any  other  two  are  four," 
or  "  any  collection  formed  of  two  twos  is  a 
collection  of  four."  If  we  can  show  that 
such  statements  as  this  really  deal  only  with 
universals,  our  proposition  may  be  regarded 
as  proved. 

One  way  of  discovering  what  a  proposition 
deals  with  is  to  ask  ourselves  what  words  we 
must  understand — in  other  words,  what  ob- 
jects we  must  be  acquainted  with — in  order 
to  see  what  the  proposition  means.  As  soon 
as  we  see  what  the  proposition  means,  even 
if  we  do  not  yet  know  whether  it  is  true 
or  false,  it  is  evident  that  we  must  have 
acquaintance  with  whatever  is  really  dealt 
with  by  the  proposition.  By  applying  this 
test,  it  appears  that  many  propositions 
which  might  seem  to  be  concerned  with  par- 
ticulars are  really  concerned  only  with  uni- 
versals. In  the  special  case  of  "  two  and 
two  are  four,"  even  when  we  interpret  it  as 
meaning  "  any  collection  formed  of  two  twos 
is  a  collection  of  four,"  it  is  plain  that  we 
can  understand  the  proposition,  i.e.  we  can 


164    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

see  what  it  is  that  it  asserts,  as  soon  as  w« 
know  what  is  meant  by  "  collection "  and 
"  two  "  and  "  four."  It  is  quite  unnecessary 
to  know  all  the  couples  in  the  world  :  if  it 
were  necessary,  obviously  we  could  never 
understand  the  proposition,  since  the  couples 
are  infinitely  numerous  and  therefore  cannot 
all  be  known  to  us .  Thus  although  our  general 
statement  implies  statements  about  parti- 
cular couples,  as  soon  as  we  know  that  there  are 
such  particular  couples,  yet  it  does  not  itself 
assert  or  imply  that  there  are  such  particular 
couples,  and  thus  fails  to  make  any  statement 
whatever  about  any  actual  particular  couple. 
The  statement  made  is  about  "couple," 
the  universal,  and  not  about  this  or  that 
couple. 

Thus  the  statement  "  two  and  two  are  four  ** 
deals  exclusively  with  universals,  and  therefore 
may  be  known  by  anybody  who  is  acquainted 
with  the  universals  concerned  and  can  per- 
ceive the  relation  between  them  which  the 
statement  asserts.  It  must  be  taken  as  a 
fact,  discovered  by  reflecting  upon  our  know- 
ledge, that  we  have  the  power  of  sometimes 


ON  KNOWLEDGE  OF  UNIVERSALS     165 

perceiving  such  relations  between  universals, 
and  therefore  of  sometimes  knowing  general 
a  priori  propositions  such  as  those  of  arith- 
metic and  logic.  The  thing  that  seemed 
mysterious,  when  we  formerly  considered  such 
knowledge,  was  that  it  seemed  to  anticipate 
and  control  experience.  This,  however,  we 
can  now  see  to  have  been  an  error.  No  fact 
concerning  anything  capable  of  being  ex- 
perienced can  be  known  independently  of 
experience.  We  know  a  priori  that  two  things 
and  two  other  things  together  make  four 
things,  but  we  do  not  know  a  priori  that  if 
Brown  and  Jones  are  two,  and  Robinson  and 
Smith  are  two,  then  Brown  and  Jones  and 
Robinson  and  Smith  are  four.  The  reason  is 
that  this  proposition  cannot  be  understood 
at  all  unless  we  know  that  there  are  such 
people  as  Brown  and  Jones  and  Robinson 
and  Smith,  and  this  we  can  only  know  by 
experience.  Hence,  although  our  general 
proposition  is  a  priori,  all  its  applications 
to  actual  particulars  involve  experience  and 
therefore  contain  an  empirical  element.  In 
this  way  what  seemed  mysterious  in  our  a 


166    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

priori  knowledge  is  seen  to  have  been  based 
upon  an  error. 

It  will  serve  to  make  the  point  clearer  if  we 
contrast  our  genuine  a  priori  judgment  with  an 
empirical  generalisation,  such  as  "  all  men  are 
mortals."  Here  as  before,  we  can  understand 
what  the  proposition  means  as  soon  as  we 
understand  the  universals  involved,  namely 
man  and  mortal.  It  is  obviously  unnecessary 
to  have  an  individual  acquaintance  with  the 
whole  human  race  in  order  to  understand 
what  our  proposition  means.  Thus  the  dif- 
ference between  an  a  priori  general  propo- 
sition and  an  empirical  generalisation  does 
not  come  in  the  meaning  of  the  proposition  ; 
it  comes  in  the  nature  of  the  evidence  for  it. 
In  the  empirical  case,  the  evidence  consists 
in  the  particular  instances.  We  believe 
that  all  men  are  mortal  because  we  know 
that  there  are  innumerable  instances  of  men 
dying,  and  no  instances  of  their  living  be- 
yond a  certain  age.  We  do  not  believe  it 
because  we  see  a  connection  between  the 
universal  man  and  the  universal  mortal.  It 
is  true  that  if  physiology  can  prove,  assum- 


ON  KNOWLEDGE  OF  UNIVERSALS    1G7 

ing  the  general  laws  that  govern  living  bodies, 
that  no  living  organism  can  last  for  ever,  that 
gives  a  connection  between  man  and  mortality 
which  would  enable  us  to  assert  our  proposi- 
tion without  appealing  to  the  special  evidence 
of  men  dying.  But  that  only  means  that  our 
generalisation  has  been  subsumed  under  a 
wider  generalisation,  for  which  the  evidence 
is  still  of  the  same  kind,  though  more  exten- 
sive. The  progress  of  science  is  constantly 
producing  such  subsumptions,  and  therefore 
giving  a  constantly  wider  inductive  basis 
for  scientific  generalisations.  But  although 
this  gives  a  greater  degree  of  certainty,  it 
does  not  give  a  different  kind  :  the  ultimate 
ground  remains  inductive,  i.e.  derived  from 
instances,  and  not  an  a  priori  connection 
of  universals  such  as  we  have  in  logic  and 
arithmetic. 

Two  opposite  points  are  to  be  observed 
concerning  a  priori  general  propositions.  The 
first  is  that,  if  many  particular  instances  are 
known,  our  general  proposition  may  be  arrived 
at  in  the  first  instance  by  induction,  and  the 
connection  of  universals  may  be  only  sub- 


168    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

sequently  perceived.  For  example,  it  is  known 
that  if  we  draw  perpendiculars  to  the  sides  of 
a  triangle  from  the  opposite  angles,  all  three 
perpendiculars  meet  in  a  point.  It  would  be 
quite  possible  to  be  first  led  to  this  proposition 
by  actually  drawing  perpendiculars  in  many 
cases,  and  finding  that  they  always  met  in  a 
point  ;  this  experience  might  lead  us  to  look 
for  the  general  proof  and  find  it.  Such  cases 
are  common  in  the  experience  of  every  mathe- 
matician. 

The  other  point  is  more  interesting,  and  of 
more  philosophical  importance.  It  is,  that 
we  may  sometimes  know  a  general  proposition 
in  cases  where  we  do  not  know  a  single  in- 
stance of  it.  Take  such  a  case  as  the  following : 
We  know  that  any  two  numbers  can  be 
multiplied  together,  and  will  give  a  third 
called  their  product.  We  know  that  all  pairs 
of  integers  the  product  of  which  is  less  than 
100  have  been  actually  multiplied  together, 
and  the  value  of  the  product  recorded  in  the 
multiplication  table.  But  we  also  know  that 
the  number  of  integers  is  infinite,  and  that 
only  a  finite  number  of  pairs  of  integers  ever 


ON  KNOWLEDGE  OF  UNIVERSALS     169 

have  been  or  ever  will  be  thought  of  by  human 
beings.  Hence  it  follows  that  there  are  pairs 
of  integers  which  never  have  been  and  never 
will  be  thought  of  by  human  beings,  and  that 
all  of  them  deal  with  integers  the  product  of 
which  is  over  10(^  Hence  we  arrive  at  the 
proposition  :  "  All  products  of  two  integers, 
which  never  have  been  and  never  will  be 
thought  of  by  any  human  being,  are  over  100." 
Here  is  a  general  proposition  of  which  the 
truth  is  undeniable,  and  yet,  from  the  very 
nature  of  the  case,  we  can  never  give  an  in- 
stance ;  because  any  two  numbers  we  may 
think  of  are  excluded  by  the  terms  of  the 
proposition. 

This  possibility,  of  knowledge  of  general 
propositions  of  which  no  instance  can  be  given, 
is  often  denied,  because  it  is  not  perceived 
that  the  knowledge  of  such  propositions  only 
requires  a  knowledge  of  the  relations  of  uni- 
versals,  and  does  not  require  any  knowledge  of 
instances  of  the  universals  in  question.  Yet 
the  knowledge  of  such  general  propositions 
is  quite  vital  to  a  great  deal  of  what  is  gener- 
ally admitted  to  be  known.     For  example,  we 


170    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

saw,  in  our  early  chapters,  that  physical 
objects,  as  opposed  to  sense-data,  are  only 
obtained  by  an  inference,  and  are  not  things 
with  which  we  are  acquainted.  Hence  we 
can  never  know  any  proposition  of  the  form 
"  this  is  a  physical  object,"  where  "  this  "  is 
something  immediately  known.  It  follows 
that  all  our  knowledge  concerning  physical 
objects  is  such  that  no  actual  instance  can  be 
given.  We  can  give  instances  of  the  associ- 
ated sense-data,  but  we  cannot  give  instances 
of  the  actual  physical  objects.  Hence  our 
knowledge  as  to  physical  objects  depends 
throughout  upon  this  possibility  of  general 
knowledge  where  no  instance  can  be  given. 
And  the  same  applies  to  our  knowledge  of 
other  people's  minds,  or  of  any  other  class  of 
things  of  which  no  instance  is  known  to  us  by 
acquaintance. 

We  may  now  take  a  survey  of  the  sources 
of  our  knowledge,  as  they  have  appeared 
in  the  course  of  our  analysis.  We  have 
first  to  distinguish  knowledge  of  things  and 
knowledge  of  truths.  In  each  there  are  two 
kinds,   one   immediate   and  one   derivative. 


ON  KNOWLEDGE  OF  UNIVERSALS    171 

Our  immediate  knowledge  of  things,  which  we 
called  acquaintance,  consists  of  two  sorts, 
according  as  the  things  known  are  particulars 
or  universals.  Among  particulars,  we  have 
acquaintance  with  sense-data  and  (probably) 
with  ourselves.  Among  universals,  there  seems 
to  be  no  principle  by  which  we  can  decide 
which  can  be  known  by  acquaintance,  but  it 
is  clear  that  among  those  that  can  be  so  known 
are  sensible  qualities,  relations  of  space  and 
time,  similarity,  and  certain  abstract  logical 
universals.  Our  derivative  knowledge  of 
things,  which  we  call  knowledge  by  descrip- 
tion, always  involves  both  acquaintance 
with  something  and  knowledge  of  truths. 
Our  immediate  knowledge  of  truths  may  be 
called  intuitive  knowledge,  and  the  truths  so 
known  may  be  called  self-evident  truths. 
Among  such  truths  are  included  those  which 
merely  state  what  is  given  in  sense,  and  also 
certain  abstract  logical  and  arithmetical  prin- 
ciples, and  (though  with  less  certainty)  some 
ethical  propositions.  Our  derivative  know- 
ledge of  truths  consists  of  everything  that 
we    can    deduce    from    self-evident   truths 


172     THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

by    the    use    of    self  -  evident    principles    of 
deduction. 
,       If  the  above  account  is  correct,  all  our  know- 

If 

■  ledge  of  truths  depends  upon  our  intuitive 
knowledge.  It  therefore  becomes  important 
to  consider  the  nature  and  scope  of  intuitive 
knowledge,  in  much  the  same  way  as,  at  an 
earlier  stage,  we  considered  the  nature  and 
scope  of  knowledge  by  acquaintance.  But 
knowledge  of  truths  raises  a  further  problem, 
which  does  not  arise  in  regard  to  knowledge 
of  things,  namely  the  problem  of  error.  Some 
of  our  beliefs  turn  out  to  be  erroneous,  and 
therefore  it  becomes  necessary  to  consider 
how,  if  at  all,  we  can  distinguish  knowledge 
from  error.  This  problem  does  not  arise 
with  regard  to  knowledge  by  acquaintance, 
for,  whatever  may  be  the  object  of  acquaint- 
ance, even  in  dreams  and  hallucinations,  there 
is  no  error  involved  so  long  as  we  do  not  go 
beyond  the  immediate  object :  error  can  only 
arise  when  we  regard  the  immediate  object, 
i.e.  the  sense-datum,  as  the  mark  of  some 
physical  object.  Thus  the  problems  con- 
nected with  knowledge   of   truths  arc  more 


ON  KNOWLEDGE  OF  UNIVERSALS     173 

difficult  than  those  connected  with  know- 
ledge of  things.  As  the  first  of  the  problems 
connected  with  knowledge  of  truths,  let  us 
examine  the  nature  and  scope  of  our  intui- 
tive judgments. 


CHAPTER   XI 

ON    INTUITIVE   KNOWLEDGE 

There  is  a  common  impression  that  every- 
thing that  we  believe  ought  to  be  capable  of 
proof,  or  at  least  of  being  shown  to  be  highly 
probable.  It  is  felt  by  many  that  a  belief 
for  which  no  reason  can  be  given  is  an  un- 
reasonable belief.  In  the  main,  this  view  is 
just.  Almost  all  our  common  beliefs  are 
either  inferred,  or  capable  of  being  inferred, 
from  other  beliefs  which  may  be  regarded  as 
giving  the  reason  for  them.  As  a  rule,  the 
reason  has  been  forgotten,  or  has  even  never 
been  consciously  present  to  our  minds.  Few 
of  us  ever  ask  ourselves,  for  example,  what 
reason  there  is  to  suppose  the  food  we  are  just 
going  to  eat  will  not  turn  out  to  be  poison. 
Yet  we  feel,  when  challenged,  that  a  perfectly 
good  reason  could  be  found,  even  if  we  are 

174 


ON   INTUITIVE   KNOWLEDGE    175 

not  ready  with  it  at  the  moment.     And  in 
this  belief  we  are  usually  justified. 

But  let  us  imagine  some  insistent  Socrates, 
who,  whatever  reason  we  give  him,  continues 
to  demand  a  reason  for  the  reason.     We  must 
sooner  or  later,  and  probably  before  very  long, 
be  driven  to  a  point  where  we  cannot  find  any 
further  reason,  and  where  it  becomes  almost 
certain  that  no  further  reason  is  even  theo- 
retically  discoverable.      Starting    with    the 
common  beliefs  of  daily  life,  we  can  be  driven 
backfrom  point  to  point,  until  we  come  to  some 
general  principle,  or  some  instance  of  a  general 
principle,   which  seems   luminously  evident, 
and  is  not  itself  capable  of  being  deduced 
from  anything  more  evident.     In  most  ques- 
tions of  daily  life,  such  as  whether  our  food  is 
likely  to  be  nourishing  and  not  poisonous,  we 
shall  be  driven  back  to  the  inductive  principle, 
which  we  discussed  in  Chapter  VI.     But  be- 
yond  that,   there   seems   to   be   no   further 
regress.     The  principle  itself  is  constantly  used 
in  our  reasoning,  sometimes  consciously,  some- 
times unconsciously  ;  but  there  is  no  reasoning 
which,  starting  from  some  simpler  self-evident 


176    THE  PROBLEMwS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

principle,  leads  us  to  the  principle  of  induction 
as  its  conclusion.  And  the  same  holds  for 
other  logical  principles.  Their  truth  is  evident 
to  us,  and  we  employ  them  in  constructing 
demonstrations  ;  but  they  themselves,  or  at 
least  some  of  them,  are  incapable  of 
demonstration. 

Self-evidence,  however,  is  not  confined  to 
those  among  general  principles  which  are 
incapable  of  proof.  When  a  certain  number 
of  logical  principles  have  been  admitted,  the 
rest  can  be  deduced  from  them ;  but  the 
propositions  deduced  are  often  just  as  self- 
evident  as  those  that  were  assumed  without 
proof.  All  arithmetic,  moreover,  can  be 
deduced  from  the  general  principles  of  logic, 
yet  the  simple  propositions  of  arithmetic, 
such  as  "  two  and  two  are  four,"  are  just 
as  self-evident  as  the  principles  of  logic. 

It  would  seem,  also,  though  this  is  more 
disputable,  that  there  are  some  self-evident 
ethical  principles,  such  as  "  we  ought  to 
pursue  what  is  good." 

It  should  be  observed  that,  in  all  casei  of 
general  principles,  particular  instances,  dealing 


ON   INTUITIVE   KNOWLEDGE    177 

with  familiar  things,  are  more  evident  than 
the  general  principle.  For  example,  the 
law  of  contradiction  states  that  nothing  can 
both  have  a  certain  property  and  not  have 
it.  This  is  evident  as  soon  as  it  is  understood, 
but  it  is  not  so  evident  as  that  a  particular 
rose  which  we  see  cannot  be  both  red  and 
not  red.  (It  is  of  course  possible,  that  parts 
of  the  rose  may  be  red  and  parts  not  red, 
or  that  the  rose  may  be  of  a  shade  of  pink 
which  we  hardly  know  whether  to  call  red 
or  not ;  but  in  the  former  case  it  is  plain  that 
the  rose  as  a  whole  is  not  red,  while  in  the 
latter  case  the  answer  is  theoretically  definite 
as  soon  as  we  have  decided  on  a  precise  de- 
finition of  "  red.")  It  is  usually  through 
particular  instances  that  we  come  to  be  able 
to  see  the  general  principle.  Only  those 
who  are  practised  in  dealing  with  abstractions 
can  readily  grasp  a  general  principle  without 
the  help  of  instances. 

In  addition  to  general  principles,  the  other 
kind  of  self-evident  truths  are  those  imme- 
diately derived  from  sensation.  We  will  call 
such  truths  "  truths  of  perception,"  and  the 


178    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

judgments  expressing  them  we  will  call 
"  judgments  of  perception."  But  here  a 
certain  amount  of  care  is  required  in  get- 
ting at  the  precise  nature  of  the  truths  that 
are  self-evident.  The  actual  sense-data  are 
neither  true  nor  false.  A  particular  patch  of 
colour  which  I  see,  for  example,  simply 
exists  :  it  is  not  the  sort  of  thing  that  is 
true  or  false.  It  is  true  that  there  is  such 
a  patch,  true  that  it  has  a  certain  shape  and 
degree  of  brightness,  true  that  it  is  surrounded 
by  certain  other  colours.  But  the  patch 
itself,  like  everything  else  in  the  world  of 
sense,  is  of  a  radically  different  kind  from 
the  things  that  are  true  or  false,  and  therefore 
cannot  properly  be  said  to  be  true.  Thus 
whatever  self-evident  truths  may  be 
obtained  from  our  senses  must  be  different 
from  the  sense-data  from  which  they  are 
obtained. 

It  would  seem  that  there  are  two  kinds  of 
self-evident  truths  of  perception,  though 
perhaps  in  the  last  analysis  the  two  kinds 
may  coalesce.  First,  there  is  the  kind 
which    simply   asserts   the   existence   of   the 


ON   INTUITIVE  KNOWLEDGE    179 

sense-datum,  without  in  any  way  analysing 
it.  We  see  a  patch  of  red,  and  we  judge 
"  there  is  such-and-such  a  patch  of  red,"  or 
more  strictly  "  there  is  that  "  ;  this  is  one 
kind  of  intuitive  judgment  of  perception. 
The  other  kind  arises  when  the  object  of 
sense  is  complex,  and  we  subject  it  to  some 
degree  of  analysis.  If,  for  instance,  we  see 
a  round  patch  of  red,  we  may  judge  "  that 
patch  of  red  is  round."  This  is  again  a 
judgment  of  perception,  but  it  differs  from 
our  previous  kind.  In  our  present  kind  we 
have  a  single  sense-datum  which  has  both 
colour  and  shape  :  the  colour  is  red  and 
the  shape  is  round.  Our  judgment  analyses 
the  datum  into  colour  and  shape,  and  then 
recombines  them  by  stating  that  the  red 
colour  is  round  in  shape.  Another  example 
of  this  kind  of  judgment  is  "  this  is  to  the 
right  of  that,"  where  "  this  "  and  "  that  " 
are  seen  simultaneously.  In  this  kind  of 
judgment  the  sense-datum  contains  con- 
stituents which  have  some  relation  to  each 
other,  and  the  judgment  asserts  that  these 
constituents  have  this  relation. 


180    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

Another  class  of  intuitive  judgments,  ana- 
logous to  those  of  sense  and  yet  quite  dis- 
tinct from  them,  are  judgments  of  memory. 
There  is  some  danger  of  confusion  as  to  the 
nature  of  memory,  owing  to  the  fact  that 
memory  of  an  object  is  apt  to  be  accompanied 
by  an  image  of  the  object,  and  yet  the  image 
cannot  be  what  constitutes  memory.  This 
is  easily  seen  by  merely  noticing  that  the 
image  is  in  the  present,  whereas  what  is 
remembered  is  known  to  be  in  the  past.  More- 
over, we  are  certainly  able  to  some  extent 
to  compare  our  image  with  the  object  re- 
membered, so  that  we  often  know,  within 
somewhat  wide  limits,  how  far  our  image  is 
accurate ;  but  this  would  be  impossible, 
unless  the  object,  as  opposed  to  the  image, 
were  in  some  way  before  the  mind.  Thus 
the  essence  of  memory  is  not  constituted  by 
the  image,  but  by  having  immediately  before 
the  mind  an  object  which  is  recognised  as 
past.  But  for  the  fact  of  memory  in  this 
sense,  we  should  not  know  that  there  evei 
was  a  past  at  all,  nor  should  we  be  able  to 
understand  the  word  "  past,"  any  more  than 


ON   INTUITIVE   KNOWLEDGE    181 

a  man  born  blind  can  understand  the  word 
"  light."  Thus  there  must  be  intuitive  judg- 
ments of  memory,  and  it  is  upon  them,  ulti- 
mately, that  all  our  knowledge  of  the  past 
depends. 

The  case  of  memory,  however,  raises  a 
difficulty,  for  it  is  notoriously  fallacious,  and 
thus  throws  doubt  on  the  trustworthiness  of 
intuitive  judgments  in  general.  This  diffi- 
culty is  no  light  one.  But  let  us  first  narrow 
its  scope  as  far  as  possible.  Broadly  speaking, 
memory  is  trustworthy  in  proportion  to  the 
vividness  of  the  experience  and  to  its  near- 
ness in  time.  If  the  house  next  door  was 
struck  by  lightning  half  a  minute  ago,  my 
memory  of  what  I  saw  and  heard  will  be  so 
reliable  that  it  would  be  preposterous  to 
doubt  whether  there  had  been  a  flash  at  all. 
And  the  same  applies  to  less  vivid  experiences, 
so  long  as  they  are  recent.  I  am  absolutely 
certain  that  half  a  minute  ago  I  was  sitting 
in  the  same  chair  in  which  I  am  sitting  now. 
Going  backward  over  the  day,  I  find  things 
of  which  I  am  quite  certain,  other  things  of 
which  I  am  almost  certain,  other  things  of 


182     THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

which  I  can  become  certain  by  thought  and 
by  calHng  up  attendant  circumstances,  and 
some  things  of  which  I  am  by  no  means 
certain.  I  am  quite  certain  that  I  ate  my 
breakfast  this  morning,  but  if  I  were  as 
indifferent  to  my  breakfast  as  a  philosopher 
should  be,  I  should  be  doubtful.  As  to  the 
conversation  at  breakfast,  I  can  recall  some 
of  it  easily,  some  with  an  effort,  some  only 
with  a  large  element  of  doubt,  and  some  not 
at  all.  Thus  there  is  a  continual  gradation 
in  the  degree  of  self-evidence  of  what  I 
remember,  and  a  corresponding  gradation  in 
the  trustworthiness  of  my  memory. 

Thus  the  first  answer  to  the  difficulty  of 
fallacious  memory  is  to  say  that  memory 
has  degrees  of  self-evidence,  and  that  these 
correspond  to  the  degrees  of  its  trustworthi- 
ness, reaching  a  limit  of  perfect  self-evidence 
and  perfect  trustworthiness  in  our  memory 
of  events  which  are  recent  and  vivid. 

It  would  seem,  however,  that  there  are 
cases  of  very  firm  belief  in  a  memory  which 
is  wholly  false.  It  is  probable  that,  in  these 
cases,   what   is   really   remembered,   in   the 


ON   INTUITIVE   KNOWLEDGE    183 

sense  of  being  immediately  before  the  mind, 
is  something  other  than  what  is  falsely 
believed  in,  though  something  generally  asso- 
ciated with  it,  George  IV.  is  said  to  have  at 
last  believed  that  he  was  at  the  battle  of 
Waterloo,  because  he  had  so  often  said  that 
he  was.  In  this  case,  what  was  immediately 
remembered  was  his  repeated  assertion  ;  the 
belief  in  what  he  was  asserting  (if  it  existed) 
would  be  produced  by  association  with  the 
remembered  assertion,  and  would  therefore 
not  be  a  genuine  case  of  memory.  It  would 
seem  that  cases  of  fallacious  memory  can 
probably  all  be  dealt  with  in  this  way,  i.e. 
they  can  be  shown  to  be  not  cases  of  memory 
in  the  strict  sense  at  all. 

One  important  point  about  self-evidence 
is  made  clear  by  the  case  of  memory,  and  that 
is,  that  self-evidence  has  degrees:  it  is  not 
a  quality  which  is  simply  present  or  absent, 
but  a  quality  which  may  be  more  or  less 
present,  in  gradations  ranging  from  absolute 
certainty  down  to  an  almost  imperceptible 
faintness.  Truths  of  perception  and  some  of 
the  principles  of  logic  have  the  very  highest 


184    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

degree  of  self-evidence  ;  truths  of  immediate 
memory  have  an  almost  equally  high  degree. 
The  inductive  principle  has  less  self-evidence 
than  some  of  the  other  principles  oi  logic, 
such  as  *'  what  follows  from  a  true  premiss 
must  be  true."  Memories  have  a  diminish- 
ing self-evidence  as  they  become  remoter  and 
fainter  ;  the  truths  of  logic  and  mathematics 
have  (broadly  speaking)  less  self-evidence  as 
they  become  more  complicated.  Judgments 
of  intrinsic  ethical  or  aesthetic  value  are  apt 
to  have  some  self-evidence,  but  not  much. 

Degrees  of  self-evidence  are  important  in 
the  theory  of  knowledge,  since,  if  proposi- 
tions may  (as  seems  likely)  have  some  degree 
of  self -evidence  without  being  true,  it  will 
not  be  necessary  to  abandon  all  connection 
between  self-evidence  and  truth,  but  merely 
to  say  that,  where  there  is  a  conflict,  the 
more  self-evident  proposition  is  to  be  retained 
and  the  less  self-evident  rejected. 

It  seems,  however,  highly  probable  that 
two  different  notions  are  combined  in  "  self- 
evidence  "  as  above  explained  ;  that  one  of 
them,    which    corresponds    to    the    highest 


ON  INTUITIVE   KNOWLEDGE    185 

degree  of  self-evidence,  is  really  an  infallible 
guarantee  of  truth,  while  the  other,  which 
corresponds  to  all  the  other  degrees,  does 
not  give  an  infallible  guarantee,  but  only  a 
greater  or  less  presumption.  This,  however, 
is  only  a  suggestion,  which  we  cannot  as  yet 
develop  further.  After  we  have  dealt  with 
the  nature  of  truth,  we  shall  return  to  the 
subject  of  self -evidence,  in  connection  with 
the  distinction  between  knowledge  and  error. 


CHAPTER    XII 

TRUTH    AND    FALSEHOOD 

Our  knowledge  of  truths,  unlike  our 
knowledge  of  things,  has  an  opposite,  namely 
error.  So  far  as  things  are  concerned,  we  may 
know  them  or  not  know  them,  but  there  is  no 
positive  state  of  mind  which  can  be  described 
as  erroneous  knowledge  of  things,  so  long,  at 
any  rate,  as  we  confine  ourselves  to  knowledge 
by  acquaintance.  Whatever  we  are  ac- 
quainted with  must  be  something  :  we  may 
draw  wrong  inferences  from  our  acquaintance, 
but  the  acquaintance  itself  cannot  be  decep- 
tive. Thus  there  is  no  dualism  as  regards 
acquaintance.  But  as  regards  knowledge  of 
truths,  there  is  a  dualism.  We  may  believe 
what  is  false  as  well  as  what  is  true.  We 
know  that  on  very  many  subjects  differ- 
ent  people  hold  different  and  incompatible 

186 


TRUTH   AND   FALSEHOOD       187 

opinions  :  hence  some  oeliefs  must  be  erro- 
neous. Since  erroneous  beliefs  are  often  held 
just  as  strongly  as  true  beliefs,  it  becomes 
a  difficult  question  how  they  are  to  be  dis- 
tinguished from  true  beliefs.  How  are  we  to 
know,  in  a  given  case,  that  our  belief  is  not 
erroneous  ?  This  is  a  question  of  the  very 
greatest  difficulty,  to  which  no  completely 
satisfactory  answer  is  possible.  There  is, 
however,  a  preliminary  question  which  is 
rather  less  difficult,  and  that  is  :  What  do  we 
viean  by  truth  and  falsehood  ?  It  is  this 
preliminary  question  which  is  to  be  considered 
in  this  chapter. 

In  this  chapter  we  are  not  asking  how  we 
can  know  whether  a  belief  is  true  or  false  :  we 
are  asking  what  is  meant  by  the  question 
whether  a  belief  is  true  or  false.  It  is  to  be 
hoped  that  a  clear  answer  to  this  question 
may  help  us  to  obtain  an  answer  to  the  ques- 
tion what  beliefs  are  true,  but  for  the  present 
we  ask  only  "  What  is  truth  ?  "  and  "  What 
is  falsehood  ?  "  not  "  What  beliefs  are  true  ?  " 
and  "  What  beliefs  are  false  ?  "  It  is  very 
important  to  keep  these  different  questions 


188    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

entirely  separate,  since  any  confusion  between 
them  is  sure  to  produce  an  answer  which  is 
not  really  applicable  to  either. 

There  are  three  points  to  observe  in  the 
attempt  to  discover  the  nature  of  truth,  three 
requisites  which  any  theory  must  fulfil. 

(1)  Our  theory  of  truth  must  be  such  as  to 
admit  of  its  opposite,  falsehood.  A  good 
many  philosophers  have  failed  adequately  to 
satisfy  this  condition  :  they  have  constructed 
theories  according  to  which  all  our  thinking 
ought  to  have  been  true,  and  have  then  had 
the  greatest  difficulty  in  finding  a  place  for 
falsehood.  In  this  respect  our  theory  of 
belief  must  differ  from  our  theory  of  acquaint- 
ance, since  in  the  case  of  acquaintance  it 
was  not  necessary  to  take  account  of  any 
opposite. 

(2)  It  seems  fairly  evident  that  if  there 
were  no  beliefs  there  could  be  no  falsehood, 
and  no  truth  either,  in  the  sense  in  which 
truth  is  correlative  to  falsehood.  If  we 
imagine  a  world  of  mere  matter,  there  would 
be  no  room  for  falsehood  in  such  a  world, 
and  although  it  would  contain  what  may  be 


TRUTH   AND   FALSEHOOD       189 

called  "  facts,"  it  would  not  contain  any 
truths,  in  the  sense  in  which  truths  are  things 
of  the  same  kind  as  falsehoods.  In  fact, 
truth  and  falsehood  are  properties  of  beliefs 
and  statements :  hence  a  world  of  mere 
matter,  since  it  would  contain  no  beliefs  or 
statements,  would  also  contain  no  truth  or 
falsehood. 

(3)  But,  as  against  what  we  have  just  said, 
it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  truth  or  falsehood 
of  a  belief  always  depends  upon  something 
which  lies  outside  the  belief  itself.  If  I  be- 
lieve that  Charles  I.  died  on  the  scaffold,  I 
believe  truly,  not  because  of  any  intrinsic 
quality  of  my  belief,  which  could  be  dis- 
covered by  merely  examining  the  belief,  but 
because  of  an  historical  event  which  happened 
two  and  a  half  centuries  ago.  If  I  believe 
that  Charles  I.  died  in  his  bed,  I  believe 
falsely  :  no  degree  of  vividness  in  my  belief, 
or  of  care  in  arriving  at  it,  prevents  it  from 
being  false,  again  because  of  what  happened 
long  ago,  and  not  because  of  any  intrinsic 
property  of  my  belief.  Hence,  although  truth 
and  falsehood  are  properties  of  beliefs,  they 


190     THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

are  properties  dependent  upon  the  relations 
of  the  behefs  to  other  things,  not  upon  any 
internal  quality  of  the  beliefs. 

The  third  of  the  above  requisites  leads  us  to 
adopt  the  view — which  has  on  the  whole 
been  commonest  among  philosophers — that 
truth  consists  in  some  form  of  correspondence 
between  belief  and  fact.  It  is,  however,  by 
no  means  an  easy  matter  to  discover  a  form 
of  correspondence  to  which  there  are  no 
irrefutable  objections.  By  this  partly — and 
partly  by  the  feeling  that,  if  truth  consists 
in  a  correspondence  of  thought  with  some- 
thing outside  thought,  thought  can  never 
know  when  truth  has  been  attained — many 
philosophers  have  been  led  to  try  to  find  some 
definition  of  truth  which  shall  not  consist  in 
relation  to  something  wholly  outside  belief. 
The  most  important  attempt  at  a  definition 
of  this  sort  is  the  theory  that  truth  consists 
in  coherence.  It  is  said  that  the  mark  of 
falsehood  is  failure  to  cohere  in  the  body  of 
our  beliefs,  and  that  it  is  the  essence  of  a 
truth  to  form  part  of  the  completely  rounded 
system  which  is  The  Truth. 


TRUTH  AND  FALSEHOOD       19i 

There  is,  however,  a  great  difficulty  in  this 
view,  or  rather  two  great  difficulties.  The 
first  is  that  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that 
only  one  coherent  body  of  beliefs  is  possible. 
It  may  be  that,  with  sufficient  imagination,  a 
novelist  might  invent  a  past  for  the  world 
that  would  perfectly  fit  on  to  what  we  know, 
and  yet  be  quite  different  from  the  real  past. 
In  more  scientific  matters,  it  is  certain  that 
there  are  often  two  or  more  hypotheses  which 
account  for  all  the  known  facts  on  some  sub- 
ject, and  although,  in  such  cases,  men  of 
science  endeavour  to  find  facts  which  will 
rule  out  all  the  hypotheses  except  one,  there 
is  no  reason  why  they  should  always  succeed. 

In  philosophy,  again,  it  seems  not  un- 
common for  two  rival  hypotheses  to  be  both 
able  to  account  for  all  the  facts.  Thus,  for 
example,  it  is  possible  that  life  is  one  long 
dream,  and  that  the  outer  world  has  only  that 
degree  of  reality  that  the  objects  of  dreams 
have  ;  but  although  such  a  view  does  not 
seem  inconsistent  with  known  facts,  there  is 
no  reason  to  prefer  it  to  the  common-sense 
view,  according  to  which  other  people  and 


192    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

things  do  really  exist.  Thus  coherence  as 
the  definition  of  truth  fails  because  there  is 
no  proof  that  there  can  be  only  one  coherent 
system. 

The  other  objection  to  this  definition  of 
truth  is  that  it  assumes  the  meaning  of  "  co- 
herence "  known,  whereas,  in  fact,  "  coher- 
ence "  presupposes  the  truth  of  the  laws  of 
logic.  Two  propositions  are  coherent  when 
both  may  be  true,  and  are  incoherent  when 
one  at  least  must  be  false.  Now  in  order  to 
know  whether  two  propositions  can  both  be 
true,  we  must  know  such  truths  as  the  law 
of  contradiction.  For  example,  the  two 
propositions  "  this  tree  is  a  beech "  and 
"  this  tree  is  not  a  beech,"  are  not  coherent, 
because  of  the  law  of  contradiction.  But 
if  the  law  of  contradiction  itself  were  sub- 
jected to  the  test  of  coherence,  we  should  find 
that,  if  we  choose  to  suppose  it  false,  nothing 
will  any  longer  be  incoherent  with  anything 
else.  Thus  the  laws  of  logic  supply  the 
skeleton  or  framework  within  which  the  test 
of  coherence  applies,  and  they  themselves 
cannot  be  established  by  this  test. 


TRUTH  AND   FALSEHOOD       198 

For  the  above  two  reasons,  coherence 
cannot  be  accepted  as  giving  the  meaning  of 
truth,  though  it  is  often  a  most  important 
test  of  truth  after  a  certain  amount  of  truth 
has  become  known. 

Hence  we  are  driven  back  to  correspondence 
with  fact  as  constituting  the  nature  of  truth. 
It  remains  to  define  precisely  what  we  mean 
by  "  fact,"  and  what  is  the  nature  of  the 
correspondence  which  must  subsist  between 
beUef  and  fact,  in  order  that  behef  may  be 
true. 

In  accordance  with  our  three  requisites, 
we  have  to  seek  a  theory  of  truth  which! 
(1)  allows  truth  to  have  an  opposite,  namely 
falsehood,  (2)  makes  truth  a  property  of 
beliefs,  but  (3)  makes  it  a  property  wholly 
dependent  upon  the  relation  of  the  beliefs, 
to  outside  things.  1 

The  necessity  of  allowing  for  falsehood 
makes  it  impossible  to  regard  belief  as  a 
relation  of  the  mind  to  a  single  object,  which 
could  be  said  to  be  what  is  believed.  If 
belief  were  so  regarded,  we  should  find  that, 
like  acquaintance,  it  would  not  admit  of  the 
a 


194    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

opposition  of  truth  and  falsehood,  but  would 
have  to  be  always  true.  This  may  be  made 
clear  by  examples.  Othello  believes  falsely 
that  Desdemona  loves  Cassio.  We  cannot 
say  that  this  belief  consists  in  a  relation  to  a 
single  object,  "  Desdemona's  love  for  Cassio," 
for  if  there  were  such  an  object,  the  belief 
would  be  true.  There  is  in  fact  no  such 
object,  and  therefore  Othello  cannot  have 
any  relation  to  such  an  object.  Hence  his 
belief  cannot  possibly  consist  in  a  relation  to 
this  object. 

It  might  be  said  that  his  belief  is  a  relation 
to  a  different  object,  namely  "  that  Desde- 
mona loves  Cassio  "  ;  but  it  is  almost  as 
difficult  to  suppose  that  there  is  such  an 
object  as  this,  when  Desdemona  does  not  love 
Cassio,  as  it  was  to  suppose  that  there  is 
"  Desdemona's  love  for  Cassio."  Hence  it 
will  be  better  to  seek  for  a  theory  of  belief 
which  does  not  make  it  consist  in  a  relation 
of  the  mind  to  a  single  object. 

It  is  common  to  think  of  relations  as  though 
they  always  held  between  two  terms,  but  in 
fact  this  is  not  always  the  case.     Some  re- 


TRUTH  AND   FALSEHOOD       195 

lations  demand  three  terms,  some  four,  and 
so    on.     Take,    for    instance,    the    relation 
"  between."     So    long    as    only    two    terms 
come   in,    the    relation    "  between "    is   im- 
possible :  three  terms  are  the  smallest  number 
that   render   it   possible.     York   is   between 
London  and  Edinburgh  ;   but  if  London  and 
Edinburgh  were  the  only  places  in  the  world, 
there  could  be  nothing  which  was  between 
one   place   and   another.     Similarly  jealousy 
requires  three  people  :   there  can  be  no  such 
relation  that  does  not  involve  three  at  least. 
Such  a  proposition  as  "  A  wishes  B  to  promote 
C's  marriage  with  D  "  involves  a  relation  of 
four  terms  ;  that  is  to  say,  A  and  B  and  C  and 
D  all  come  in,  and  the  relation  involved  cannot 
be  expressed  otherwise  than  in  a  form  in- 
volving all  four.     Instances  might  be  multi- 
plied indefinitely,  but  enough  has  been  said 
to  show  that  there  are  relations  which  re- 
quire more  than  two  terms  before  they  can 

occur. 

The  relation  involved  in  judging  or  be- 
lieving must,  if  falsehood  is  to  be  duly  allowed 
for,  be  taken  to  be  a  relation  between  several 


196    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

terms,    not    between    two.     When    Othello 
believes   that   Desdemona   loves   Cassio,   he 
must  not  have  before  his  mind  a  single  object, 
"  Desdemona's   love   for   Cassio,"    or   "  that 
Desdemona   loves    Cassio,"    for   that   would 
require  that  there  should  be  objective  false- 
hoods,  which  subsist  independently  of  any 
minds  ;    and    this,  though  not  logically  re- 
futable, is  a  theory  to  be  avoided  if  possible. 
Thus  it  is  easier  to  account  for  falsehood  if 
we  take  judgment  to  be  a  relation  in  which 
the  mind  and  the  various  objects  concerned 
all  occur  severally  ;  that  is  to  say,  Desdemona 
and  loving  and  Cassio  must  all  be  terms  in 
the    relation    which    subsists    when    Othello 
believes  that  Desdemona  loves  Cassio.     This 
relation,  therefore,  is  a  relation  of  four  terms, 
since  Othello  also  is  one  of  the  terms  of  the 
relation.     When  we  say  that  it  is  a  relation  of 
four  terms,  we  do  not  mean  that  Othello  has 
a  certain  relation  to  Desdemona,  and  has  the 
same  relation  to  loving  and  also  to  Cassio. 
This  may  be  true  of  some  other  relation  than 
believing ;    but  believing,   plainly,  is  not  a 
relation  which  Othello  has  to  each  of  the  three 


TRUTH  AND  FALSEHOOD       197 

terms  concerned,  but  to  all  of  them  together  : 
there  is  only  one  example  of  the  relation  of 
believing  involved,  but  this  one  example 
knits  together  four  terms.  Thus  the  actual 
occurrence,  at  the  moment  when  Othello  is 
entertaining  his  belief,  is  that  the  relation 
called  "believing"  is  knitting  together  into 
one  complex  whole  the  four  terms  Othello, 
Desdemona,  loving,  and  Cassio.  What  is 
called  belief  or  judgment  is  nothing  but  this 
relation  of  believing  or  judging,  which  relates 
a  mind  to  several  things  other  than  itself.  An 
act  of  belief  or  of  judgment  is  the  occurrence 
between  certain  terms  at  some  particular 
time,  of  the  relation  of  believing  or  judging. 
We  are  now  in  a  position  to  understand 
what  it  is  that  distinguishes  a  true  judgment 
from  a  false  one.  For  this  purpose  we  will 
adopt  certain  definitions.  In  every  act  of 
judgment  there  is  a  mind  which  judges,  and 
there  are  terms  concerning  which  it  judges. 
We  will  call  the  mind  the  subject  in  the 
judgment,  and  the  remaining  terms  the 
objects.  Thus,  when  Othello  judges  that  Des- 
demona loves  Cassio,  Othello  is  the  subject, 


198    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

while  the  objects  are  Desdemona  and  loving 
and  Cassio.  The  subject  and  the  objects 
together  are  called  the  constituents  of  the 
judgment.  It  will  be  observed  that  the 
relation  of  judging  has  what  is  called  a 
"  sense  "  or  "  direction."  We  may  say,  meta- 
phorically, that  it  puts  its  objects  in  a  certain 
order,  which  we  may  indicate  by  means  of 
the  order  of  the  words  in  the  sentence.  (In 
an  inflected  language,  the  same  thing  will 
be  indicated  by  inflections,  e.g.  by  the  differ- 
ence between  nominative  and  accusative.) 
Othello's  judgment  that  Cassio  loves  Desde- 
mona differs  from  his  judgment  that  Desde- 
mona loves  Cassio,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  it 
consists  of  the  same  constituents,  because  the 
relation  of  judging  places  the  constituents 
in  a  different  order  in  the  two  cases.  Simi- 
larly, if  Cassio  judges  that  Desdemona  loves 
Othello,  the  constituents  of  the  judgment  are 
still  the  same,  but  their  order  is  different. 
This  property  of  having  a  "sense"  or  "di- 
rection "  is  one  which  the  relation  of  judging 
shares  with  all  other  relations.  The  "  sense  " 
of  relations  is  the  ultimate  source  of  order 


TRUTH  AND   FALSEHOOD       199 

and  series  and  a  host  of  mathematical  con- 
cepts ;  but  we  need  not  concern  ourselves 
further  with  this  aspect. 

We  spoke  of  the  relation  called  "  judging  " 
or  "  believing  "  as  knitting  together  into  one 
complex  whole  the  subject  and  the  objects,  i 
In  this  respect,  judging  is  exactly  like  every 
other  relation.  Whenever  a  relation  holds 
between  two  or  more  terms,  it  unites  the 
terms  into  a  complex  whole.  If  Othello 
loves  Desdemona,  there  is  such  a  complex 
whole  as  "  Othello's  love  for  Desdemona." 
The  terms  united  by  the  relation  may  be 
themselves  complex,  or  may  be  simple,  but 
the  whole  which  results  from  their  being 
united  must  be  complex.  Wherever  there 
is  a  relation  which  relates  certain  terms,  there 
is  a  complex  object  formed  of  the  union 
of  those  terms ;  and  conversely,  wherever 
there  is  a  complex  object,  there  is  a  relation 
which  relates  its  constituents.  When  an 
act  of  believing  occurs,  there  is  a  complex, 
in  which  "  believing "  is  the  uniting  re- 
lation, and  subject  and  objects  are  arranged 
in  a  certain  order  by  the  "sense"  of  the 


200    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

relation   of   believing.     Among   the   objects, 
as  we  saw  in  considering  "  Othello  believes 
that  Desdemona  loves  Cassio,"  one  must  be 
a    relation — in    this    instance,    the    relation 
"  loving."     But  this  relation,  as  it  occurs  in 
the  act  of  believing,  is  not  the  relation  which 
creates  the  unity  of  the  complex  whole  con- 
sisting of  the  subject  and  the  objects.     The 
relation  "  loving,"  as  it  occurs  in  the  act  of 
believing,  is  one  of  the  objects — it  is  a  brick 
in    the    structure,     not    the    cement.     The 
cement  is  the  relation  "  believing."     When 
the  belief  is  true,  there  is  another  complex 
unity,  in  which  the  relation  which  was  one 
of  the  objects  of  the  belief  relates  the  other 
objects.     Thus,  e.g.,  if  Othello  believes  truly 
that  Desdemona  loves  Cassio,  then  there  is 
a    complex    unity,    "  Desdemona's    love   for 
Cassio,"    which   is    composed   exclusively   of 
the  objects  of  the  belief,  in  the  same  order  as 
they  had  in  the  belief,  with  the  relation  which 
was  one  of  the  objects  occurring  now  as  the 
cement  that  binds  together  the  other  objects 
of  the  belief.     On  the  other  hand,  when  a 
belief  is  false,  there  is  no  such  complex  unity 


TRUTH  AND   FALSEHOOD         201 

composed  only  of  the  objects  of  the  oelief. 
If  Othello  believes  falsely  that  Desdemona 
loves  Cassio,  then  there  is  no  such  complex 
unity  as  "  Desdemona's  love  for  Cassio." 

Thus  a  belief  is  true  when  it  corresponds  to 
a  certain  associated  complex,  and  false  when 
it  does  not.  Assuming,  for  the  sake  of  defi- 
niteness,  that  the  objects  of  the  belief  are 
two  terms  and  a  relation,  the  terms  being  put 
in  a  certain  order  by  the  "  sense  "  of  the 
believing,  then  if  the  two  terms  in  that  order 
are  united  by  the  relation  into  a  complex, 
the  belief  is  true ;  if  not,  it  is  false.  This 
constitutes  the  definition  of  truth  and  false- 
hood that  we  were  in  search  of.  Judging  or 
believing  is  a  certain  complex  unity  of  which 
a  mind  is  a  constituent ;  if  the  remaining 
constituents,  taken  in  the  order  which  they 
have  in  the  belief,  form  a  complex  unity, 
then  the  belief  is  true  ;   if  not,  it  is  false. 

Thus  although  truth  and  falsehood  are 
properties  of  beliefs,  yet  they  are  in  a  sense 
extrinsic  properties,  for  the  condition  of  the 
truth  of  a  belief  is  something  not  involving 
beliefs,  or  (in  general)  any  mind  at  all,  but 


202     THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

only  the  objects  of  the  belief.  A  mind,  which 
believes,  believes  truly  when  there  is  a  corre- 
sponding complex  not  involving  the  mind,  but 
only  its  objects.  This  correspondence  ensures 
truth,  and  its  absence  entails  falsehood. 
Hence  we  account  simultaneously  for  the  two 
'  facts  that  beliefs  (o)  depend  on  minds  for 
their  existence,  (6)  do  not  depend  on  minds 
for  their  truth. 

We  may  restate  our  theory  as  follows  ;  If 
we  take  such  a  belief  as  "  Othello  believes 
that  Desdemona  loves  Cassio,"  we  will  call 
Desdemona  and  Cassio  the  object-terms,  and 
loving  the  object-relation.  If  there  is  a  com- 
plex unity  "  Desdemona's  love  for  Cassio," 
consisting  of  the  object-terms  related  by  the 
object-relation  in  the  same  order  as  they  have 
in  the  belief,  then  this  complex  unity  is  called 
the  fact  corresponding  to  the  belief.  Thus  a 
belief  is  true  when  there  is  a  corresponding 
fact,  and  is  false  when  there  is  no  correspond- 
ing fact. 

It  will  be  seen  that  minds  do  not  create 
truth  or  falsehood.  They  create  beliefs,  but 
when  once  the  beliefs  are  created,  the  mind 


TRUTH  AND   FALSEHOOD        203 

cannot  make  them  true  or  false,  except  in  the 
special  case  where  they  concern  future  things 
which  are  within  the  power  of  the  person 
believing,  such  as  catching  trains.  What 
makes  a  belief  true  is  a  fact,  and  this  fact  does 
not  (except  in  exceptional  cases)  in  any  way 
involve  the  mind  of  the  person  who  has  the 
belief. 

Having  now  decided  what  we  mean  by 
truth  and  falsehood,  we  have  next  to  consider 
what  ways  there  are  of  knowing  whether  this 
or  that  belief  is  true  or  false.  This  considera- 
tion will  occupy  the  next  chapter. 


CHAPTER  XIII 

KNOWLEDGE,    ERROR,    AND    PROBABLE 
OPINION 

The  question  as  to  what  we  mean  by  truth 
and  falsehood,  which  we  considered  in  the 
preceding  chapter,  is  of  much  less  interest 
than  the  question  as  to  how  we  can  know  what 
is  true  and  what  is  false.  This  question  will 
occupy  us  in  the  present  chapter.  There  can 
be  no  doubt  that  some  of  our  beliefs  are 
erroneous  ;  thus  we  are  led  to  inquire  what 
certainty  we  can  ever  have  that  such  and 
such  a  belief  is  not  erroneous.  In  other  words, 
can  we  ever  know  anything  at  all,  or  do  we 
merely  sometimes  by  good  luck  believe  what 
is  true  ?  Before  we  can  attack  this  question, 
we  must,  however,  first  decide  what  we  mean 
by  "  knowing,"  and  this  question  is  not  so 
easy  as  might  be  supposed. 

204 


KNOWLEDGE   AND    ERROR     205 

At  first  sight  we  might  imagine  that  know- 
ledge could  be  defined  as  "  true  belief.'* 
When  what  we  believe  is  true,  it  might  be 
supposed  that  we  had  achieved  a  knowledge 
of  what  we  believe.  But  this  would  not  ac- 
cord with  the  way  in  which  the  word  is 
commonly  used.  To  take  a  very  trivial  in- 
stance :  If  a  man  believes  that  the  late 
Prime  Minister's  last  name  began  with  a  B,  he 
believes  what  is  true,  since  the  late  Prime 
Minister  was  Sir  Henry  Campbell  Bannerman. 
But  if  he  believes  that  Mr.  Balfour  was  the 
late  Prime  Minister,  he  will  still  believe  that 
the  late  Prime  Minister's  last  name  began 
with  a  B,  yet  this  belief,  though  true,  would 
not  be  thought  to  constitute  knowledge.  If  a 
newspaper,  by  an  intelligent  anticipation, 
announces  the  result  of  a  battle  before  any 
telegram  giving  the  result  has  been  received,  it 
may  by  good  fortune  announce  what  after- 
wards turns  out  to  be  the  right  result,  and  it 
may  produce  belief  in  some  of  its  less  experi- 
enced readers.  But  in  spite  of  the  truth  of 
their  belief,  they  cannot  be  said  to  have  know- 
ledge.    Thus  it  is  clear  that  a  true  belief  is  not 


206     THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

knowledge  when  it  is  deduced  from  a  false 
belief. 

In  like  manner,  a  true  belief  cannot  be 
called  knowledge  when  it  is  deduced  by  a 
fallacious  process  of  reasoning,  even  if  the 
premisses  from  which  it  is  deduced  are  true. 
If  I  know  that  all  Greeks  are  men  and  that 
Socrates  was  a  man,  and  I  infer  that  Socrates 
was  a  Greek,  I  cannot  be  said  to  know  that 
Socrates  was  a  Greek,  because,  although  my 
premisses  and  my  conclusion  are  true,  the 
conclusion  does  not  follow  from  the  premisses. 

But  are  we  to  say  that  nothing  is  knowledge 
except  what  is  validly  deduced  from  true 
premisses  ?  Obviously  we  cannot  say  this. 
Such  a  definition  is  at  once  too  wide  and  too 
narrow.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  too  wide, 
because  it  is  not  enough  that  our  premisses 
should  be  true,  they  must  also  be  known.  The 
man  who  believes  that  Mr.  Balfour  was  the 
late  Prime  Minister  may  proceed  to  draw 
valid  deductions  from  the  true  premiss  that  the 
late  Prime  Minister's  name  began  with  a  B, 
but  he  cannot  be  said  to  know  the  conclusions 
reached  by  these  deductions.     Thus  we  shall 


KNOWLEDGE    AND    ERROR     207 

have  to  amend  our  definition  by  saying  that 
knowledge  is  what  is  vaHdly  deduced  from 
known  premisses.  This,  however,  is  a  cir- 
cular definition  :  it  assumes  that  we  already 
know  what  is  meant  by  "  known  premisses." 
It  can,  therefore,  at  best  define  one  sort  of 
knowledge,  the  sort  we  call  derivative,  as 
opposed  to  intuitive  knowledge.  We  may 
say  :  "  Derivative  knowledge  is  what  is  validly 
deduced  from  premisses  known  intuitively." 
In  this  statement  there  is  no  formal  defect, 
but  it  leaves  the  definition  of  intuitive  know- 
ledge still  to  seek. 

Leaving  on  one  side,  for  the  moment,  the 
question  of  intuitive  knowledge,  let  us  con- 
sider the  above  suggested  definition  of  de- 
rivative knowledge.  The  chief  objection  to 
it  is  that  it  unduly  limits  knowledge.  It 
constantly  happens  that  people  entertain  a 
true  belief,  which  has  grown  up  in  them  be- 
cause of  some  piece  of  intuitive  knowledge  from 
which  it  is  capable  of  being  validly  inferred, 
but  from  which  it  has  not,  as  a  matter  of  fact, 
been  inferred  by  any  logical  process. 

Take,  for  example,  the  beliefs  produced  by 


208    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

reading.  If  the  newspapers  announce  the 
death  of  the  King,  we  are  fairly  well  justified 
in  believing  that  the  King  is  dead,  since  this 
is  the  sort  of  announcement  which  would  not 
be  made  if  it  were  false.  And  we  are  quite 
amply  justified  in  believing  that  the  news- 
paper asserts  that  the  King  is  dead.  But  here 
the  intuitive  knowledge  upon  which  our  belief 
is  based  is  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  sense- 
data  derived  from  looking  at  the  print  which 
gives  the  news.  This  knowledge  scarcely 
rises  into  consciousness,  except  in  a  person 
who  cannot  read  easily.  A  child  may  be 
aware  of  the  shapes  of  the  letters,  and  pass 
gradually  and  painfully  to  a  realisation  of 
their  meaning.  But  anybody  accustomed  to 
reading  passes  at  once  to  what  the  letters 
mean,  and  is  not  av/are,  except  on  reflection, 
that  he  has  derived  this  knowledge  from  the 
sense-data  called  seeing  the  printed  letters. 
Thus  although  a  valid  inference  from  the 
letters  to  their  meaning  is  possible,  and  could 
be  performed  by  the  reader,  it  is  not  in  fact 
performed,  since  he  does  not  in  fact  perform 
any  operation  which  can  be  called  logical 


KNOWLEDGE   AND    ERROR      200 

inference.  Yet  it  would  be  absurd  to  say- 
that  the  reader  does  not  know  that  the  news- 
paper announces  the  King's  death. 

We  must,  therefore,  admit  as  derivative 
knowledge  whatever  is  the  result  of  intuitive 
knowledge  even  if  by  mere  association,  pro- 
vided there  is  a  valid  logical  connection,  and 
the  person  in  question  could  become  aware  of 
this  connection  by  reflection.  There  are  in 
fact  many  ways,  besides  logical  inference,  by 
which  we  pass  from  one  belief  to  another  :  the 
passage  from  the  print  to  its  meaning  illus- 
trates these  ways.  These  ways  may  be  called 
"  psychological  inference."  We  shall,  then, 
admit  such  psychological  inference  as  a  means 
of  obtaining  derivative  knowledge,  provided 
there  is  a  discoverable  logical  inference  which 
runs  parallel  to  the  psychological  inference. 
This  renders  our  definition  of  derivative  know- 
ledge less  precise  than  we  could  wish,  since 
the  word  "  discoverable  "  is  vague  :  it  does 
not  tell  us  how  much  reflection  may  be  needed 
in  order  to  make  the  discovery.  But  in  fact 
"  knowledge  "  is  not  a  precise  conception  :  it 
merges  into  "  probable  opinion,"  as  we  shall 


210    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

see  more  fully  in  the  course  of  the  present 
chapter.  A  very  precise  definition,  therefore, 
should  not  be  sought,  since  any  such  definition 
must  be  more  or  less  misleading. 

The  chief  difficulty  in  regard  to  knowledge, 
however,  does  not  arise  over  derivative  know- 
ledge, but  over  intuitive  knowledge.  So  long 
as  we  are  dealing  with  derivative  knowledge, 
we  have  the  test  of  intuitive  knowledge  to  fall 
back  upon.  But  in  regard  to  intuitive  beliefs, 
it  is  by  no  means  easy  to  discover  any  criterion 
by  which  to  distinguish  some  as  true  and 
others  as  erroneous.  In  this  question  it  is 
scarcely  possible  to  reach  any  very  precise 
result :  all  our  knowledge  of  truths  is  infected 
with  some  degree  of  doubt,  and  a  theory  which 
ignored  this  fact  would  be  plainly  wrong. 
Something  may  be  done,  however,  to  mitigate 
the  difficulties  of  the  question. 

Our  theory  of  truth,  to  begin  with,  supplies 
the  possibility  of  distinguishing  certain  truths 
as  self-evident  in  a  sense  which  ensures  in- 
fallibility. When  a  belief  is  true,  we  said, 
there  is  a  corresponding  fact,  in  which  the 
several  objects  of  the  belief  form  a  single 


KNOWLEDGE  AND  ERROR        211 

complex.  The  belief  is  said  to  constitute 
knowledge  of  this  fact,  provided  it  fulfils  those 
further  somewhat  vague  conditions  which  we 
have  been  considering  in  the  present  chapter. 
But  in  regard  to  any  fact,  besides  the  know- 
ledge constituted  by  belief,  we  may  also  have 
the  kind  of  knowledge  constituted  by  per- 
ception (taking  this  word  in  its  widest  possible 
sense).  For  example,  if  you  know  the  hour 
of  the  sunset,  you  can  at  that  hour  know  the 
fact  that  the  sun  is  setting  :  this  is  knowledge 
of  the  fact  by  way  of  knowledge  of  truths  ; 
but  you  can  also,  if  the  weather  is  fine,  look 
to  the  west  and  actually  see  the  setting  sun  : 
you  then  know  the  same  fact  by  the  way  of 
knowledge  of  things. 

Thus  in  regard  to  any  complex  fact,  there 
are,  theoretically,  two  ways  in  which  it  may 
be  known  :  (1)  by  means  of  a  judgment,  in 
which  its  several  parts  are  judged  to  be 
related  as  they  are  in  fact  related  ;  (2)  by 
means  of  acquaintance  with  the  complex  fact 
itself,  which  may  (in  a  large  sense)  be  called 
perception,  though  it  is  by  no  means  confined 
to   objects   of  the   senses.     Now  it  will   be 


212     THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

observed  that  the  second  way  of  knowing  a 
complex  fact,  the  way  of  acquaintance,  is 
only  possible  when  there  really  is  such  a  fact, 
while  the  first  way,  like  all  judgment,  is 
liable  to  error.  The  second  way  gives  us 
the  complex  whole,  and  is  therefore  only 
possible  when  its  parts  do  actually  have  that 
relation  which  makes  them  combine  to  form 
such  a  complex.  The  first  way,  on  the  con- 
trary, gives  us  the  parts  and  the  relation 
severally,  and  demands  only  the  reality  of 
the  parts  and  the  relation  :  the  relation  may 
not  relate  those  parts  in  that  way,  and  yet 
the  judgment  may  occur. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  at  the  end  of 
Chapter  XI  we  suggested  that  there  might 
be  two  kinds  of  self-evidence,  one  giving  an 
absolute  guarantee  of  truth,  the  other  only  a 
partial  guarantee.  These  two  kinds  can  now 
be  distinguished. 

We  may  say  that  a  truth  is  self-evident, 
in  the  first  and  most  absolute  sense,  when 
we  have  acquaintance  with  the  fact  which 
corresponds  to  the  truth.  When  Othello 
believes  that  Desdemona  loves  Cassio,  the 


KNOWLEDGE    AND    ERROR     218 

corresponding  fact,  if  his  belief  were  true, 
would  be  "  Desdemona's  love  for  Cassio." 
This  would  be  a  fact  with  which  no  one  could 
have  acquaintance  except  Desdemona  ;  hence 
in  the  sense  of  self-evidence  that  we  are  con- 
sidering, the  truth  that  Desdemona  loves 
Cassio  (if  it  were  a  truth)  could  only  be  self- 
evident  to  Desdemona.  All  mental  facts, 
and  all  facts  concerning  sense-data,  have  this 
same  privacy  :  there  is  only  one  person  to 
whom  they  can  be  self-evident  in  our  present 
sense,  since  there  is  only  one  person  who  can 
be  acquainted  with  the  mental  things  or  the 
sense-data  concerned.  Thus  no  fact  about 
any  particular  existing  thing  can  be  self- 
evident  to  more  than  one  person.  On  the 
other  hand,  facts  about  universals  do  not 
have  this  privacy.  Many  minds  may  be 
acquainted  with  the  same  universals  ;  hence 
a  relation  between  universals  may  be  known 
by  acquaintance  to  many  different  people. 
In  all  cases  where  we  know  by  acquaintance 
a  complex  fact  consisting  of  certain  terms  in 
a  certain  relation,  we  say  that  the  truth  that 
these  terms  are  so  related  has  the  first  or 


214     THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

absolute  kind  of  self-evidence,  and  in  these 
cases  the  judgment  that  the  terms  are  so 
related  must  be  true.  Thus  this  sort  of  self- 
evidence  is  an  absolute  guarantee  of  truth. 

But  although  this  sort  of  self-evidence  is  an 
absolute  guarantee  of  truth,  it  does  not  enable 
us  to  be  absolutely  certain,  in  the  case  of  any 
given  judgment,  that  the  judgment  in  ques- 
tion is  true.  Suppose  we  first  perceive  the 
sun  shining,  which  is  a  complex  fact,  and 
thence  proceed  to  make  the  judgment  "  the 
sun  is  shining."  In  passing  from  the  per- 
ception to  the  judgment,  it  is  necessary  to 
analyse  the  given  complex  fact :  we  have  to 
separate  out  "  the  sun  "  and  "  shining  "  as 
constituents  of  the  fact.  In  this  process  it 
is  possible  to  commit  an  error ;  hence  even 
where  a  fact  has  the  first  or  absolute  kind  of 
self-evidence,  a  judgment  believed  to  corre- 
spond to  the  fact  is  not  absolutely  infallible, 
because  it  may  not  really  correspond  to  the 
fact.  But  if  it  does  correspond  (in  the  sense 
explained  in  the  preceding  chapter),  then  it 
must  be  true. 

The  second  sort  of  self -evidence  will  be  that 


KNOWLEDGE    AND   ERROR     215 

which  belongs  to  judgments  in  the  first 
instance,  and  is  not  derived  from  direct 
perception  of  a  fact  as  a  single  complex 
whole.  This  second  kind  of  self-evidence 
will  have  degrees,  from  the  very  highest 
degree  down  to  a  bare  inclination  in  favour 
of  the  belief.  Take,  for  example,  the  case  of 
a  horse  trotting  away  from  us  along  a  hard 
road.  At  first  our  certainty  that  we  hear  the 
hoofs  is  complete  ;  gradually,  if  we  listen 
intently,  there  comes  a  moment  when  we 
think  perhaps  it  was  imagination  or  the  blind 
upstairs  or  our  own  heart-beats  ;  at  last  we 
become  doubtful  whether  there  was  any  noise 
at  all ;  then  we  think  we  no  longer  hear 
anything,  and  at  last  we  know  we  no  longer 
hear  anything.  In  this  process,  there  is  a 
continual  gradation  of  self-evidence,  from  the 
highest  degree  to  the  least,  not  in  the  sense- 
data  themselves,  but  in  the  judgments  based 
on  them. 

Or  again:  Suppose  we  are  comparing  two 
shades  of  colour,  one  blue  and  one  green. 
We  can  be  quite  sure  they  are  different  shades 
of  colour  ;  but  if  the  green  colour  is  gradually 


216     THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

altered  to  be  more  and  more  like  the  blue, 
becoming  first  a  blue-green,  then  a  greeny- 
blue,  then  blue,  there  will  come  a  moment 
when  we  are  doubtful  whether  we  can  see  any 
difference,  and  then  a  moment  when  we 
know  that  we  cannot  see  any  difference. 
The  same  thing  happens  in  tuning  a  musical 
instrument,  or  in  any  other  case  where  there 
is  a  continuous  gradation.  Thus  self-evidence 
of  this  sort  is  a  matter  of  degree ;  and  it 
seems  plain  that  the  higher  degrees  are  more 
to  be  trusted  than  the  lower  degrees. 

In  derivative  knowledge  our  ultimate 
premisses  must  have  some  degree  of  self- 
evidence,  and  so  must  their  connection  with 
the  conclusions  deduced  from  them.  Take  for 
example  a  piece  of  reasoning  in  geometry. 
It  is  not  enough  that  the  axioms  from  which 
we  start  should  be  self-evident :  it  is  necessary 
also  that,  at  each  step  in  the  reasoning,  the 
connection  of  premiss  and  conclusion  should 
be  self-evident.  In  difficult  reasoning,  this 
connection  has  often  only  a  very  small  degree 
of  self -evidence  ;  hence  errors  of  reasoning  are 
not  improbable  where  the  difficulty  is  great. 


KNOWLEDGE    AND    ERROR     217 

From  what  has  been  said  it  is  evident  that, 
both  as  regards  intuitive  knowledge  and  as 
regards  derivative  knowledge,  if  we  assume 
that  intuitive  knowledge  is  trustworthy  in 
proportion  to  the  degree  of  its  self-evidence, 
there  will  be  a  gradation  in  trustworthiness, 
from  the  existence  of  noteworthy  sense-data 
and  the  simpler  truths  of  logic  and  arith- 
metic, which  may  be  taken  as  quite  certain, 
down  to  judgments   which  seem   only  just 
more  probable  than  their  opposites.     What 
we  firmly  believe,  if  it  is  true,  is  called  know- 1 
ledge,  provided  it  is  either  intuitive  or  in-| 
f erred    (logically    or    psychologically)    from] 
intuitive   knowledge   from   which   it   follows ' 
logically.     What  we  firmly  believe,  if  it  is  not] 
true,  is  called  error.     What  we  firmly  believe, ' 
if  it  is  neither  knowledge  nor  error,  and  also 
what  we  believe  hesitatingly,  because  it  is, 
or  is  derived  from,  something  which  has  not 
the  highest  degree  of  self -evidence,  may  be 
called    probable   opinion.     Thus   the   greater 
part  of  what  would  commonly  pass  as  know- 
ledge is  more  or  less  probable  opinion. 

In   regard   to   probable   opinion,    we   can 


218    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

derive  great  assistance  from  coherence,  which 
we  rejected  as  the  definition  of  truth,  but  may 
often  use  as  a  criterion.  A  body  of  individu- 
ally probable  opinions,  if  they  are  mutually 
coherent,  become  more  probable  than  any  one 
of  them  would  be  individually.  It  is  in  this 
way  that  many  scientific  hypotheses  acquire 
their  probability.  They  fit  into  a  coherent 
system  of  probable  opinions,  and  thus  become 
more  probable  than  they  would  be  in  isola- 
tion. The  same  thing  applies  to  general 
philosophical  hypotheses.  Often  in  a  single 
case  such  hypotheses  may  seem  highly  doubt- 
ful, while  yet,  when  we  consider  the  order 
and  coherence  which  they  introduce  into  a 
mass  of  probable  opinion,  they  become  pretty 
nearly  certain.  This  applies,  in  particular, 
to  such  matters  as  the  distinction  between 
dreams  and  waking  life.  If  our  dreams,  night 
after  night,  were  as  coherent  one  with  another 
as  our  days,  we  should  hardly  know  whether 
to  believe  the  dreams  or  the  waking  life. 
As  it  is,  the  test  of  coherence  condemns  the 
dreams  and  confirms  the  waking  life.  But 
this    test,    though    it    increases    probability 


I 


KNOWLEDGE    AND    ERROR     219 

wnere  it  is  successful,  never  gives  absolute 
certainty,  unless  there  is  certainty  already 
at  some  point  in  the  coherent  system.  Thus 
the  mere  organisation  of  probable  opinion 
will  never,  by  itself,  transform  it  into  in- 
dubitable knowledge. 


CHAPTER   XIV 

THE    LIMITS    OF    PHILOSOPHICAL    KNOW- 
LEDGE 

In  all  that  we  have  said  hitherto  concerning 
philosophy,  we  have  scarcely  touched  on  many 
matters  that  occupy  a  great  space  in  the 
writings  of  most  philosophers.  Most  philo- 
sophers— or,  at  any  rate,  very  many — profess 
to  be  able  to  prove,  by  a  priori  metaphysical 
reasoning,  such  things  as  the  fundamental 
dogmas  of  religion,  the  essential  rationality 
of  the  universe,  the  illusoriness  of  matter,  the 
unreality  of  all  evil,  and  so  on.  There  can  be 
no  doubt  that  the  hope  of  finding  reason  to 
believe  such  theses  as  these  has  been  the 
chief  inspiration  of  many  life-long  students 
of  philosophy.  This  hope,  I  believe,  is  vain. 
It  would  seem  that  knowledge  concerning  the 
universe  as  a  whole  is  not  to  be  obtained  by 
metaphysics,  and  that  the  proposed  proofs 
that,  in  virtue  of  the  laws  of  logic,  such  and 

220 


THE   LIMITS   OF  KNOWLEDGE    2J1 

such  things  must  exist  and  such  and  such 
others  cannot,  are  not  capable  of  surviving  a 
critical  scrutiny.  In  this  chapter  we  shall 
briefly  consider  the  kind  of  way  in  which 
such  reasoning  is  attempted,  with  a  view 
to  discovering  whether  we  can  hope  that  it 
may  be  valid. 

The  great  representative,  in  modern  times, 
of  the  kind  of  view  which  we  wish  to  examine, 
was  Hegel  (1770-1831).  Hegel's  philosophy 
is  very  difficult,  and  commentators  differ 
as  to  the  true  interpretation  of  it.  Ac- 
cording to  the  interpretation  I  shall  adopt, 
which  is  that  of  many,  if  not  most  of  the 
commentators,  and  has  the  merit  of  giving 
an  interesting  and  important  type  of  phil- 
osophy, his  main  thesis  is  that  everything 
short  of  the  Whole  is  obviously  fragmentary, 
and  obviously  incapable  of  existing  without 
the  complement  supplied  by  the  rest  of  the 
world.  Just  as  a  comparative  anatomist,  from 
a  single  bone,  sees  what  kind  of  animal  the 
whole  must  have  been,  so  the  metaphysician, 
according  to  Hegel,  sees,  from  any  one  piece 
of  reality,  what  the  whole  of  reality  must  be — 


222    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

at  least  in  its  large  outlines.  Every  ap- 
parently separate  piece  of  reality  has,  as  it 
were,  hooks  which  grapple  it  to  the  next  piece ; 
the  next  piece,  in  turn,  has  fresh  hooks,  and  so 
on,  until  the  whole  universe  is  reconstructed. 
This  essential  incompleteness  appears,  accord- 
ing to  Hegel,  equally  in  the  world  of  thought 
and  in  the  world  of  things.  In  the  world  of 
thought,  if  we  take  any  idea  which  is  abstract 
or  incomplete,  we  find,  on  examination,  that, 
if  we  forget  its  incompleteness,  we  become 
involved  in  contradictions ;  these  contra- 
dictions turn  the  idea  in  question  into  its 
opposite,  or  antithesis  ;  and  in  order  to  escape, 
we  have  to  find  a  new,  less  incomplete  idea, 
which  is  the  synthesis  of  our  original  idea  and 
its  antithesis. 

This  new  idea,  though  less  incomplete  than 
the  idea  we  started  with,  will  be  found,  never- 
theless, to  be  still  not  wholly  complete,  but  to 
pass  into  its  antithesis,  with  which  it  must  be 
combined  in  a  new  synthesis.  In  this  waj'^ 
Hegel  advances  until  he  reaches  the  "  Absolute 
Idea,"  which,  according  to  him,  has  no  in- 
completeness,  no  opposite,   and  no  need  of 


THE   LIMITS   OF   KNOWLEDGE    223 

further  development.  The  Absolute  Idea, 
therefore,  is  adequate  to  describe  Absolute 
Reality  ;  but  all  lower  ideas  only  describe 
reality  as  it  appears  to  a  partial  view,  not  as 
it  is  to  one  who  simultaneously  surveys  the 
Whole.  Thus  Hegel  reaches  the  conclusion 
that  Absolute  Reality  forms  one  single  har- 
monious system,  not  in  space  or  time,  not  in 
any  degree  evil,  wholly  rational,  and  wholly 
spiritual.  Any  appearance  to  the  contrary,  in 
the  world  we  know,  can  be  proved  logically — 
so  he  believes — to  be  entirely  due  to  our 
fragmentary  piecemeal  view  of  the  universe. 
If  we  saw  the  universe  whole,  as  we  may 
suppose  God  sees  it,  space  and  time  and  matter 
and  evil  and  all  striving  and  struggling  would 
disappear,  and  we  should  see  instead  an  eternal  ] 
perfect  unchanging  spiritual  unity.  \ 

In  this  conception,  there  is  undeniably  some- 
thing sublime,  something  to  which  we  could 
wish  to  yield  assent.  Nevertheless,  when  the 
arguments  in  support  of  it  are  carefully 
examined,  they  appear  to  involve  much  con- 
fusion and  many  unwarrantable  assumptions. 
The  fundamental  tenet  upon  which  the  system 


224    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

is  built  up  is  that  what  is  incomplete  must  be 
not  self-subsistent,  but  must  need  the  support 
of  other  things  before  it  can  exist.  It  is  held 
that  whatever  has  relations  to  things  outside 
itself  must  contain  some  reference  to  those 
outside  things  in  its  own  nature,  and  could 
not,  therefore,  be  what  it  is  if  those  outside 
things  did  not  exist.  A  man's  nature,  for 
example,  is  constituted  by  his  memories  and 
the  rest  of  his  knowledge,  by  his  loves  and 
hatreds,  and  so  on ;  thus,  but  for  the  objects 
which  he  knows  or  loves  or  hates,  he  could 
not  be  what  he  is.  He  is  essentially  and 
obviously  a  fragment :  taken  as  the  sum-total 
of  reality  he  would  be  self-contradictory. 

This  whole  point  of  view,  however,  turns 
upon  the  notion  of  the  "  nature  "  of  a  thing, 
which  seems  to  mean  "'  all  the  truths  about 
the  thing."  It  is  of  course  the  case  that  a 
truth  which  connects  one  thing  with  another 
thing  could  not  subsist  if  the  other  thing 
did  not  subsist.  But  a  truth  about  a  thing 
is  not  part  of  the  thing  itself,  although  it 
must,  according  to  the  above  usage,  be  part 
of  the  "  nature  "  of  the  thing.     If  we  mean 


THE   LIMITS   OF  KNOWLEDGE    225 

by  a  thing's  "  nature  "  all  the  truths  about  the 
thing,  then  plainly  we  cannot  know  a  thing's 
"  nature  "  unless  we  know  all  the  thing's  re- 
lations to  all  the  other  things  in  the  universe. 
But  if  the  word  "  nature  "  is  used  in  this 
sense,  we  shall  have  to  hold  that  the  thing 
may  be  known  when  its  "  nature  "  is  not 
known,  or  at  any  rate  is  not  known  completely. 
There  is  a  confusion,  when  this  use  of  the 
word  "  nature  "  is  employed,  between  know- 
ledge of  things  and  knowledge  of  truths.  We 
may  have  knowledge  of  a  thing  by  acquaint- 
ance even  if  we  know  very  few  propositions 
about  it — theoretically  we  need  not  know  any 
propositions  about  it.  Thus,  acquaintance 
with  a  thing  does  not  involve  knowledge  of  its 
"  nature  "  in  the  above  sense.  And  although 
acquaintance  with  a  thing  is  involved  in  our 
knowing  any  one  proposition  about  a  thing, 
knowledge  of  its  "  nature,"  in  the  above  sense, 
is  not  involved.  Hence,  ( 1 )  acquaintance  with 
a  thing  does  not  logically  involve  a  knowledge 
of  its  relations,  and  (2)  a  knowledge  of  some  of 
its  relations  does  not  involve  a  knowledge 
of  all  of  its  relations  nor  a  knowledge  of  its 


226    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

"  nature  "  in  the  above  sense.  I  may  be  ac- 
quainted, for  example,  with  my  toothache, 
and  this  knowledge  may  be  as  complete  as 
knowledge  by  acquaintance  ever  can  be,  with- 
out knowing  all  that  the  dentist  (who  is  not 
acquainted  with  it)  can  tell  me  about  its 
cause,  and  without  therefore  knowing  its 
"  nature  "  in  the  above  sense.  Thus  the  fact 
that  a  thing  has  relations  does  not  prove  that 
its  relations  are  logically  necessary.  That  is 
to  say,  from  the  mere  fact  that  it  is  the  thing 
it  is  we  cannot  deduce  that  it  must  have  the 
various  relations  which  in  fact  it  has.  This 
only  seems  to  follow  because  we  know  it 
already. 

It  follows  that  we  cannot  prove  that  the 
universe  as  a  whole  forms  a  single  harmonious 
system  such  as  Hegel  believes  that  it  forms. 
And  if  we  cannot  prove  this,  we  also  cannot 
prove  the  unreality  of  space  and  time  and 
matter  and  evil,  for  this  is  deduced  by  Hegel 
from  the  fragmentary  and  relational  character 
of  these  things.  Thus  we  are  left  to  the 
piecemeal  investigation  of  the  world,  and  are 
unable  to  know  the  characters  of  those  parts 


THE  LIMITS   OF   KNOWLEDGE    227 

of  the  universe  that  are  remote  from  our  ex- 
perience. This  result,  disappointing  as  it  is 
to  those  whose  hopes  have  been  raised  by  the 
systems  of  philosophers,  is  in  harmony  with 
the  inductive  and  scientific  temper  of  our  age, 
and  is  borne  out  by  the  whole  examination 
of  human  knowledge  which  has  occupied  our 
previous  chapters. 

Most  of  the  great  ambitious  attempts  of 
metaphysicians  have  proceeded  by  the  at- 
tempt to  prove  that  such  and  such  apparent 
features  of  the  actual  world  were  self-contra- 
dictory, and  therefore  could  not  be  real.  The 
whole  tendency  of  modern  thought,  however,  1 
is  more  and  more  in  the  direction  of  showing 
that  the  supposed  contradictions  were  illusory, 
and  that  very  little  can  be  proved  a  priori 
from  considerations  of  what  must  be.  A  good 
illustration  of  this  is  afforded  by  space  and 
time.  Space  and  time  appear  to  be  infinite 
in  extent,  and  infinitely  divisible.  If  we 
travel  along  a  straight  line  in  either  direction, 
it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  we  shall  finally 
reach  a  last  point,  beyond  which  there  is 
nothing,  not  even  empty  space.     Similarly,  if 


228     THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

in  imagination  we  travel  backwards  or  for- 
wards in  time,  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  we 
shall  reach  a  first  or  last  time,  with  not  even 
empty  time  beyond  it.  Thus  space  and  time 
appear  to  be  infinite  in  extent. 

Again,  if  we  take  any  two  points  on  a  line, 
it  seems  evident  that  there  must  be  other 
points  between  them,  however  small  the  dis- 
tance between  them  may  be  :  every  distance 
can  be  halved,  and  the  halves  can  be  halved 
again,  and  so  on  ad  infinitum.  In  time, 
similarly,  however  little  time  may  elapse 
between  two  moments,  it  seems  evident  that 
there  will  be  other  moments  between  them. 
Thus  space  and  time  appear  to  be  infinitely 
divisible.  But  as  against  these  apparent  facts 
— infinite  extent  and  infiiiite  divisibility — 
philosophers  have  advanced  arguments  tend- 
ing to  show  that  there  could  be  no  infinite 
collections  of  things,  and  that  therefore  the 
number  of  points  in  space,  or  of  instants  in 
time,  must  be  finite.  Thus  a  contradiction 
emerged  between  the  apparent  nature  of  space 
and  time  and  the  supposed  impossibility  of 
infinite  collections. 


THE   LIMITS   OF  KNOWLEDGE    229 

Kant,  who  first  emphasised  this  contradic- 
tion, deduced  the  impossibihty  of  space  and 
time,  which  he  declared  to  be  merely  sub- 
jective ;  and  since  his  time  very  many  philo- 
sophers have  believed  that  space  and  time 
are  mere  appearance,  not  characteristic  of  the 
world  as  it  really  is.  Now,  however,  owing 
to  the  labours  of  the  mathematicians,  notably 
Georg  Cantor,  it  has  appeared  that  the  impos- 
sibility of  infinite  collections  was  a  mistake. 
They  are  not  in  fact  self-contradictory,  but 
only  contradictory  of  certain  rather  obstinate 
mental  prejudices.  Hence  the  reasons  for 
regarding  space  and  time  as  unreal  have  be- 
come inoperative,  and  one  of  the  great  sources 
of  metaphysical  constructions  is  dried  up. 

The  mathematicians,  however,  have  not 
been  content  with  showing  that  space  as  it  is 
commonly  supposed  to  be  is  possible  ;  they 
have  shown  also  that  many  other  forms  of 
space  are  equally  possible,  so  far  as  logic  can 
show.  Some  of  Euclid's  axioms,  which  appear 
to  common  sense  to  be  necessary,  and  were 
formerly  supposed  to  be  necessary  by  philo- 
sophers, are  now  known  to  derive  their  appear- 


230    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

ance  of  necessity  from  our  mere  familiarity 
with  actual  space,  and  not  from  any  a  priori 
logical  foundation.  By  imagining  worlds  in 
which  these  axioms  are  false,  the  mathemati- 
cians have  used  logic  to  loosen  the  prejudices 
of  common  sense,  and  to  show  the  possibility 
of  spaces  differing — some  more,  some  less — 
from  that  in  which  we  live.  And  some  of  these 
spaces  differ  so  little  from  Euclidean  space, 
where  distances  such  as  we  can  measure  are 
concerned,  that  it  is  impossible  to  discover  by 
observation  whether  our  actual  space  is  strictly 
Euclidean  or  of  one  of  these  other  kinds. 
Thus  the  position  is  completely  reversed. 
Formerly  it  appeared  that  experience  left 
only  one  kind  of  space  to  logic,  and  logic 
showed  this  one  kind  to  be  impossible.  Now, 
logic  presents  many  kinds  of  space  as  possible 
apart  from  experience,  and  experience  only 
partially  decides  between  them.  Thus,  while 
our  knowledge  of  what  is  has  become  less  than 
it  was  formerly  supposed  to  be,  our  knowledge 
of  what  may  be  is  enormously  increased.  In- 
stead of  being  shut  in  within  narrow  walls, 
of  which  every  nook  and  cranny  could  be 


THE  LIMITS  OF  KNOWLEDGE    281 

explored,  we  find  ourselves  in  an  open 
world  of  free  possibilities,  where  much  remains 
unknown  because  there  is  so  much  to  know. 

What  has  happened  in  the  case  of  space  and 
time  has  happened,  to  some  extent,  in  other 
directions  as  well.  The  attempt  to  prescribe 
to  the  universe  by  means  of  a  priori  principles 
has  broken  down ;  logic,  instead  of  being,  as 
formerly,  the  bar  to  possibilities,  has  become 
the  great  liberator  of  the  imagination,  present- 
ing innumerable  alternatives  which  are  closed 
to  unrefiective  common  sense,  and  leaving  to 
experience  the  task  of  deciding,  where  decision 
is  possible,  between  the  many  worlds  which 
logic  offers  for  our  choice.  Thus  knowledge  as 
to  what  exists  becomes  limited  to  what  v/e  can 
learn  from  experience — not  to  what  we  can 
actually  experience,  for,  as  we  have  seen,  there 
is  much  knowledge  by  description  concerning 
things  of  which  we  have  no  direct  experience. 
But  in  all  cases  of  knowledge  by  description, 
we  need  some  connection  of  universals,  enab- 
ling us,  from  such  and  such  a  datum,  to  infer 
an  object  of  a  certain  sort  as  implied  by  our 
datum.     Thus  in  regard  to  physical  objects, 


232     THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

for  example,  the  principle  that  sense-data  are 
signs  of  physical  objects  is  itself  a  connection 
of  universals  ;  and  it  is  only  in  virtue  of  this 
principle  that  experience  enables  us  to  acquire 
knowledge  concerning  physical  objects.  The 
same  applies  to  the  law  of  causality,  or,  to 
descend  to  what  is  less  general,  to  such  prin- 
ciples as  the  law  of  gravitation. 

Principles  such  as  the  law  of  gravitation 
are  proved,  or  rather  are  rendered  highly 
probable,  by  a  combination  of  experience  with 
some  wholly  a  priori  principle,  such  as  the 
principle  of  induction.  Thus  our  intuitive 
knowledge,  which  is  the  source  of  all  our  other 
knowledge  of  truths,  is  of  two  sorts  ;  pure 
empirical  knowledge,  which  tells  us  of  the 
existence  and  some  of  the  properties  of  parti- 
cular things  with  which  we  are  acquainted, 
and  pure  a  priori  knowledge,  which  gives  us 
connections  between  universals,  and  enables 
us  to  draw  inferences  from  the  particular 
facts  given  in  empirical  knowledge.  Our  deri- 
vative knowledge  always  depends  upon  some 
pure  a  priori  knowledge  and  usually  also  de- 
pends upon  some  pure  empirical  knowledge. 


THE   LIMITS   OF   KNOWLEDGE    233 

Philosophical  knowledge,  if  what  has  been 
said  above  is  true,  does  not  differ  essentially 
from  scientific  knowledge  ;  there  is  no  special 
source  of  wisdom  which  is  open  to  philosophy 
but  not  to  science,  and  the  results  obtained  by 
philosophy  are  not  radically  different  from 
those  obtained  from  science.  The  essential 
characteristic  of  philosophy,  which  makes  it  a 
study  distinct  from  science,  is  criticism.  It 
examines  critically  the  principles  employed  in 
science  and  in  daily  life ;  it  searches  out  any  in- 
consistencies there  may  be  in  these  principles, 
and  it  only  accepts  them  when,  as  the  result  of 
a  critical  inquiry,  no  reason  for  rejecting  them 
has  appeared.  If,  as  many  philosophers  have 
believed,  the  principles  underlying  the  sciences 
were  capable,  when  disengaged  from  irrelevant 
detail,  of  giving  us  knowledge  concerning  the 
universe  as  a  whole,  such  knowledge  would 
have  the  same  claim  on  our  belief  as  scientific 
knowledge  has  ;  but  our  inquiry  has  not  re- 
vealed any  such  knowledge,  and  therefore,  as 
regards  the  special  doctrines  of  the  bolder 
metaphysicians,  has  had  a  mainly  negative 
result.     But  as  regards  what  would  be  com- 


234    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

monly  accepted  as  knowledge,  our  result  is  in 
the  main  positive :  we  have  seldom  found 
reason  to  reject  such  knowledge  as  the  result 
of  our  criticism,  and  we  have  seen  no  reason 
to  suppose  man  incapable  of  the  kind  of 
knowledge  which  he  is  generally  believed 
to  possess. 

When,  however,  we  speak  of  philosophy  as 
a  criticism  of  knowledge,  it  is  necessary  to  im- 
pose a  certain  limitation.  If  we  adopt  the 
attitude  of  the  complete  sceptic,  placing  our- 
selves wholly  outside  all  knowledge,  and 
asking,  from  this  outside  position,  to  be 
compelled  to  return  within  the  circle  of 
knowledge,  we  are  demanding  what  is  im- 
possible, and  our  scepticism  can  never  be 
refuted.  For  all  refutation  must  begin  with 
some  piece  of  knowledge  which  the  dispu- 
tants share  ;  from  blank  doubt,  no  argument 
can  begin.  Hence  the  criticism  of  knowledge 
which  philosophy  employs  must  not  be  of 
this  destructive  kind,  if  any  result  is  to  be 
achieved.  Against  this  absolute  scepticism, 
no  logical  argument  can  be  advanced.  But  it 
is  not  difficult  to  see  that  scepticism  of  this 


THE  LIMITS   OF  KNOWLEDGE    235 

kind  is  unreasonable.  Descartes'  "  methodi- 
cal doubt,"  with  which  modern  philosophy 
began,  is  not  of  this  kind,  but  is  rather  the 
kind  of  criticism  which  we  are  asserting  to  be 
the  essence  of  philosophy.  His  "  methodical 
doubt "  consisted  in  doubting  whatever 
seemed  doubtful ;  in  pausing,  with  each  ap- 
parent piece  of  knowledge,  to  ask  himself 
whether,  on  reflection,  he  could  feel  certain 
that  he  really  knew  it.  This  is  the  kind  of 
criticism  which  constitutes  philosophy.  Some 
knowledge,  such  as  knowledge  of  the  existence 
of  our  sense-data,  appears  quite  indubitable, 
however  calmly  and  thoroughly  we  reflect 
upon  it.  In  regard  to  such  knowledge,  philo- 
sophical criticism  does  not  require  that  we 
should  abstain  from  belief.  But  there  are 
beliefs — such,  for  example,  as  the  belief  that 
physical  objects  exactly  resemble  our  sense- 
data — which  are  entertained  until  we  begin 
to  reflect,  but  are  found  to  melt  away  when 
subjected  to  a  close  inquiry.  Such  beliefs 
philosophy  will  bid  us  reject,  unless  some 
new  line  of  argument  is  found  to  support 
them.     But  to  reject  the  beliefs  which  do  not 


236     THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

appear  open  to  any  objections,  however 
closely  we  examine  them,  is  not  reasonable, 
and  is  not  what  philosophy  advocates. 

The  criticism  aimed  at,  in  a  word,  is  not 
that  which,  without  reason,  determines  to  re- 
ject, but  that  which  considers  each  piece  of 
apparent  knowledge  on  its  merits,  and  retains 
whatever  still  appears  to  be  knowledge  when 
this  consideration  is  completed.  That  some 
risk  of  error  remains  must  be  admitted,  since 
human  beings  are  fallible.  Philosophy  may 
claim  justly  that  it  diminishes  the  risk  of  error, 
and  that  in  some  cases  it  renders  the  risk  so 
small  as  to  be  practically  negligible.  To  do 
more  than  this  is  not  possible  in  a  world  where 
mistakes  must  occur  ;  and  more  than  this  no 
prudent  advocate  of  philosophy  would  claim 
to  have  performed. 


CHAPTER  XV 

THE    VALUE   OF   PHILOSOPHY 

Having  now  come  to  the  end  of  our  brief 
and  very  incomplete  review  of  the  problems 
of  philosophy,  it  will  be  well  to  consider,  in 
conclusion,  what  is  the  value  of  philosophy 
and  why  it  ought  to  be  studied.  It  is  the 
more  necessary  to  consider  this  question,  in 
view  of  the  fact  that  many  men,  under  the 
influence  of  science  or  of  practical  affairs,  are 
inclined  to  doubt  whether  philosophy  is  any- 
thing better  than  innocent  but  useless  trifling, 
hair-splittingdistinctions,  and  controversies  on 
matters  concerning  which  knowledge  is  im- 
possible. 

This  view  of  philosophy  appears  to  result, 
partly  from  a  wrong  conception  of  the  ends 
of  life,  partly  from  a  wrong  conception  of 
the  kind  of  goods  which  philosophy  strives  to 

237 


288     THE  PROBLEMS  01  PHILOSOPHY 

achieve.  Physical  science,  through  the  me- 
dium of  inventions,  is  useful  to  innumerable 
people  who  are  wholly  ignorant  of  it ;  thus 
the  study  of  physical  science  is  to  be  recom- 
mended, not  only,  or  primarily,  because  of  the 
effect  on  the  student,  but  rather  because  of 
the  effect  on  mankind  in  general.  This  utility 
does  not  belong  to  philosophy.  If  the  study 
of  philosophy  has  any  value  at  all  for  others 
than  students  of  philosophy,  it  must  be  only 
indirectly,  through  its  effects  upon  the  lives 
of  those  who  study  it.  It  is  in  these  effects, 
therefore,  if  anywhere,  that  the  value  of 
philosophy  must  be  primarily  sought. 

But  further,  if  we  are  not  to  fail  in  our  en- 
deavour to  determine  the  value  of  philosophy, 
we  must  first  free  our  minds  from  the  pre- 
judices of  what  are  wrongly  called  "  practical " 
men.  The  "  practical  "  man,  as  this  word  is 
often  used,  is  one  who  recognises  only  material 
needs,  who  realises  that  men  must  have  food 
for  the  body,  but  is  oblivious  of  the  necessity 
of  providing  food  for  the  mind.  If  all  men 
were  well  off,  if  poverty  and  disease  had  been 
reduced  to  their  lowest  possible  point,  there 


THE  VALUE  OF  PHILOSOPHY    239 

would  still  remain  much  to  be  done  to  produce 
a  valuable  society  ;  and  even  in  the  existing 
world  the  goods  of  the  mind  are  at  least  as 
important  as  the  goods  of  the  body.  It  is 
exclusively  among  the  goods  of  the  mind  that 
the  value  of  philosophy  is  to  be  found  ;  and 
only  those  who  are  not  indifferent  to  these 
goods  can  be  persuaded  that  the  study  of 
philosophy  is  not  a  waste  of  time. 

Philosophy,  like  all  other  studies,  aims 
primarily  at  knowledge.  The  knowledge  it 
aims  at  is  the  kind  of  knowledge  which  gives 
unity  and  system  to  the  body  of  the  sciences, 
and  the  kind  which  results  from  a  critical 
examination  of  the  grounds  of  our  convictions, 
prejudices,  and  beliefs.  But  it  cannot  be 
maintained  that  philosophy  has  had  any  very 
great  measure  of  success  in  its  attempts  to 
provide  definite  answers  to  its  questions.  If 
you  ask  a  mathematician,  a  mineralogist,  a 
historian,  or  any  other  man  of  learning,  what 
definite  body  of  truths  has  been  ascertained 
by  his  science,  his  answer  will  last  as  long  as 
you  are  willing  to  listen.  But  if  you  put  the 
same  question  to  a  philosopher,  he  will,  if  he  is 


240    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

candid,  have  to  confess  that  his  study  has  not 
achieved  positive  results  such  as  have  been 
achieved  by  other  sciences.  It  is  true  that 
this  is  partly  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that, 
as  soon  as  definite  knowledge  concerning  any 
subject  becomes  possible,  this  subject  ceases 
to  be  called  philosophy,  and  becomes  a  sepa- 
rate science.  The  whole  study  of  the  heavens, 
which  now  belongs  to  astronomy,  was  once 
included  in  philosophy  ;  Newton's  great  work 
was  called  "  the  mathematical  principles  of 
natural  philosophy."  Similarly,  the  study  of 
the  human  mind,  which  was,  until  very  lately, 
a  part  of  philosophy,  has  now  been  separated 
from  philosophy  and  has  become  the  science 
of  psychology.  Thus,  to  a  great  extent,  the 
uncertainty  of  philosophy  is  more  apparent 
than  real  :  those  questions  which  are  already 
capable  of  definite  answers  are  placed  in  the 
sciences,  while  those  only  to  which,  at  present, 
no  definite  answer  can  be  given,  remain  to 
form  the  residue  which  is  called  philosophy. 

This  is,  however,  only  a  part  of  the  truth 
concerning  the  uncertainty  of  philosophy. 
There  are  many  questions — and  among  them 


THE   VALUE   OF   PHILOSOPHY    241 

those  that  are  of  the  profoundest  interest 
to  our  spiritual  life — which,  so  far  as  we 
can  see,  must  remain  insoluble  to  the  human 
intellect  unless  its  powers  become  of  quite  a 
different  order  from  what  they  are  now.  Has 
the  universe  any  unity  of  plan  or  purpose,  or 
is  it  a  fortuitous  concourse  of  atoms  ?  Is 
consciousness  a  permanent  part  of  the  uni- 
verse, giving  hope  of  indefinite  growth  in 
wisdom,  or  is  it  a  transitory  accident  on  a 
small  planet  on  which  life  must  ultimately 
become  impossible  ?  Are  good  and  evil  of 
importance  to  the  universe  or  only  to  man  ? 
Such  questions  are  asked  by  philosophy,  and 
variously  answered  by  various  philosophers. 
But  it  would  seem  that,  whether  answers  be 
otherwise  discoverable  or  not,  the  answers 
suggested  by  philosophy  are  none  of  them 
demonstrably  true.  Yet,  however  slight  may 
be  the  hope  of  discovering  an  answer,  it  is 
part  of  the  business  of  philosophy  to  continue 
the  consideration  of  such  questions,  to  make  us 
aware  of  their  importance,  to  examine  all  the 
approaches  to  them,  and  to  keep  alive  that 
speculative  interest  in  the  universe  which  is 


242     THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

apt  to  be  killed  by  confining  ourselves  to 
definitely  ascertainable  knowledge. 

Many  philosophers,  it  is  true,  have  held  that 
philosophy  could  establish  the  truth  of  certain 
answers  to  such  fundamental  questions.  They 
have  supposed  that  what  is  of  most  importance 
in  religious  beliefs  could  be  proved  by  strict 
demonstration  to  be  true.  In  order  to  judge 
of  such  attempts,  it  is  necessary  to  take  a 
survey  of  human  knowledge,  and  to  form  an 
opinion  as  to  its  methods  and  its  limitations. 
On  such  a  subject  it  would  be  unwise  to 
pronounce  dogmatically  ;  but  if  the  investi- 
gations of  our  previous  chapters  have  not  led 
us  astray,  we  shall  be  compelled  to  renounce 
the  hope  of  finding  philosophical  proofs  of 
religious  beliefs.  We  cannot,  therefore,  in- 
clude as  part  of  the  value  of  philosophy  any 
definite  set  of  answers  to  such  questions. 
Hence,  once  more,  the  value  of  philosophy 
must  not  depend  upon  any  supposed  body  of 
definitely  ascertainable  knowledge  to  be  ac- 
quired by  those  who  study  it. 

The  value  of  philosophy  is,  in  fact,  to  be 
sought  largely  in  its  very  uncertainty.     The 


THE   VALUE  OF   PHILOSOPHY    243 

man  who  has  no  tincture  of  philosophy  goes 
through  Hfe  imprisoned  in  the  prejudices  de- 
rived from  common  sense,  from  the  habitual 
beliefs  of  his  age  or  his  nation,  and  from 
convictions  which  have  grown  up  in  his  mind  / 
without  the  co-operation  or  consent  of  hisj 
deliberate  reason.  To  such  a  man  the  world 
tends  to  become  definite,  finite,  obvious ; 
common  objects  rouse  no  questions,  and  un- 
familiar possibilities  are  contemptuously  re- 
jected. As  soon  as  we  begin  to  philosophise, 
on  the  contrary,  we  find,  as  we  saw  in  our 
opening  chapters,  that  even  the  most  every- 
day things  lead  to  problems  to  which  only 
very  incomplete  answers  can  be  given.  Philo- 
sophy, though  unable  to  tell  us  with  certainty 
what  is  the  true  answer  to  the  doubts  which 
it  raises,  is  able  to  suggest  many  possibilities 
which  enlarge  our  thoughts  and  free  them 
from  the  tyranny  of  custom.  Thus,  while 
diminishing  our  feeling  of  certainty  as  to  what 
things  are,  it  greatly  increases  our  knowledge 
as  to  what  they  may  be  ;  it  removes  the  some- 
what arrogant  dogmatism  of  those  who  have 
never  travelled  into  the  region  of  liberating 


2i4     THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

doubt,  and  it  keeps  alive  our  sense  of  wonder 
by  showing  familiar  things  in  an  unfamiliar 
aspect. 

Apart  from  its  utility  in  showing  unsus- 
pected possibilities,  philosophy  has  a  value — 
perhaps  its  chief  value — through  the  greatness 
of  the  objects  which  it  contemplates,  and  the 
freedom  from  narrow  and  personal  aims  re- 
sulting from  this  contemplation.  The  life  of 
the  instinctive  man  is  shut  up  within  the 
circle  of  his  private  interests :  family  and 
friends  may  be  included,  but  the  outer  world 
is  not  regarded  except  as  it  may  help  or  hinder 
what  comes  within  the  circle  of  instinctive 
wishes.  In  such  a  life  there  is  something 
feverish  and  confined,  in  comparison  with 
which  the  philosophic  life  is  calm  and  free. 
The  private  world  of  instinctive  interests  is  a 
small  one,  set  in  the  midst  of  a  great  and  power- 
ful world  which  must,  sooner  or  later,  lay  our 
private  world  in  ruins.  Unless  we  can  so 
enlarge  our  interests  as  to  include  the  whole 
outer  world,  we  remain  like  a  garrison  in  a 
beleaguered  fortress,  knowing  that  the  enemy 
prevents  escape  and  that  ultimate  surrender 


THE   VALUE   OF   PHILOSOPHY    245 

is  inevitable.  In  such  a  life  there  is  no  peace, 
but  a  constant  strife  between  the  insistence  of 
desire  and  the  powerlessness  of  will.  In  one 
way  or  another,  if  our  life  is  to  be  great  and 
free,  we  must  escape  this  prison  and  this 
strife. 

One  way  of  escape  is  by  philosophic  con- 
templation. Philosophic  contemplation  does 
not,  in  its  widest  survey,  divide  the  universe 
into  two  hostile  camps — friends  and  foes, 
helpful  and  hostile,  good  and  bad — it  views 
the  whole  impartially.  Philosophic  con- 
templation, when  it  is  unalloyed,  does  not 
aim  at  proving  that  the  rest  of  the  universe 
is  akin  to  man.  All  acquisition  of  knowledge 
is  an  enlargement  of  the  Self,  but  this  enlarge- 
ment is  best  attained  when  it  is  not  directly 
sought.  It  is  obtained  when  the  desire  for 
knowledge  is  alone  operative,  by  a  study 
which  does  not  wish  in  advance  that  its 
objects  should  have  this  or  that  character, 
but  adapts  the  Self  to  the  characters  which 
it  finds  in  its  objects.  This  enlargement  of 
Self  is  not  obtained  when,  taking  the  Self  as 
it  is,  we  try  to  show  that  the  world  is  so  similar 


246     THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

to  this  Self  that  knowledge  of  it  is  possible 
without  any  admission  of  what  seems  alien. 
The  desire  to  prove  this  is  a  form  of  self-asser- 
tion, and  like  all  self-assertion,  it  is  an  obstacle 
to  the  growth  of  Self  which  it  desires,  and  of 
which  the  Self  knows  that  it  is  capable.  Self- 
assertion,  in  philosophic  speculation  as  else- 
where, views  the  world  as  a  means  to  its  own 
ends  ;  thus  it  makes  the  world  of  less  account 
than  Self,  and  the  Self  sets  bounds  to  the 
greatness  of  its  goods.  In  contemplation, 
on  the  contrary,  we  start  from  the  not-Self, 
and  through  its  greatness  the  boundaries  of 
Self  are  enlarged  ;  through  the  infinity  of  the 
universe  the  mind  which  contemplates  it 
achieves  some  share  in  infinity. 

For  this  reason  greatness  of  soul  is  not 
fostered  by  those  philosophies  which  as- 
similate the  universe  to  Man.  Knowledge  is 
a  form  of  union  of  Self  and  not-Self  ;  like 
all  union,  it  is  impaired  by  dominion,  and 
therefore  by  any  attempt  to  force  the  uni- 
verse into  conformity  with  what  we  find  in 
ourselves.  There  is  a  widespread  philosophi- 
cal tendency  towards  the  view  which   tells 


THE   VALUE   OF   PHILOSOPHY    247 

us  that  man  is  the  measure  of  all  things, 
that  truth  is  man-made,  that  space  and  time 
and  the  world  of  universals  are  properties  of 
the  mind,  and  that,  if  there  be  anything  not 
created  by  the  mind,  it  is  unknowable  and  of 
no  account  for  us.  This  view,  if  our  previous 
discussions  were  correct,  is  untrue ;  but  in 
addition  to  being  untrue,  it  has  the  effect  of 
robbing  philosophic  contemplation  of  all  that 
gives  it  value,  since  it  fetters  contemplation  to 
Self.  What  it  calls  knowledge  is  not  a  union 
with  the  not-Self,  but  a  set  of  prejudices, 
habits,  and  desires,  making  an  impenetrable 
veil  between  us  and  the  world  beyond.  The 
man  who  finds  pleasure  in  such  a  theory  of 
knowledge  is  like  the  man  who  never  leaves 
the  domestic  circle  for  fear  his  word  might 
not  be  law. 

The  true  philosophic  contemplation,  on  the 
contrary,  finds  its  satisfaction  in  every  en- 
largement of  the  not-Self,  in  everything  that 
magnifies  the  objects  contemplated,  and 
thereby  the  subject  contemplating.  Every- 
thing, in  contemplation,  that  is  personal  or 
private,  everything  that  depends  upon  habit. 


248     THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

self-interest,  or  desire,  distorts  the  object,  and 
hence  impairs  the  union  which  the  intellect 
seeks.  By  thus  making  a  barrier  between 
subject  and  object,  such  personal  and  private 
things  become  a  prison  to  the  intellect.  The 
free  intellect  will  see  as  God  might  see,  without 
a  here  and  now,  without  hopes  and  fears, 
without  the  trammels  of  customary  beliefs 
and  traditional  prejudices,  calmly,  dispassion- 
ately, in  the  sole  and  exclusive  desire  of  know- 
ledge— knowledge  as  impersonal,  as  purely 
contemplative,  as  it  is  possible  for  man  to 
attain.  Hence  also  the  free  intellect  will  value 
more  the  abstract  and  universal  knowledge 
into  which  the  accidents  of  private  history  do 
not  enter,  than  the  knowledge  brought  by  the 
senses,  and  dependent,  as  such  knowledge 
must  be,  upon  an  exclusive  and  personal  point 
of  view  and  a  body  whose  sense-organs  distort 
as  much  as  they  reveal. 

The  mind  which  has  become  accustomed  to 
the  freedom  and  impartiality  of  philosophic 
contemplation  will  preserve  something  of  the 
same  freedom  and  impartiality  in  the  world  of 
action  and  emotion.     It  will  view  its  purposes 


THE   VALUE   OF   PHILOSOPHY    249 

and  desires  as  parts  of  the  whole,  with  the 
absence  of  insistence  that  results  from  seeing 
them  as  infinitesimal  fragments  in  a  world  of 
which  all  the  rest  is  unaffected  by  any  one 
man's  deeds.  The  impartiality  which,  in  con- 
templation, is  the  unalloyed  desire  for  truth,  is 
the  very  same  quality  of  mind  which,  in  action, 
is  justice,  and  in  emotion  is  that  universal 
love  which  can  be  given  to  all,  and  not  only  to 
those  who  are  judged  useful  or  admirable. 
Thus  contemplation  enlarges  not  only  the  ob- 
jects of  our  thoughts,  but  also  the  objects  of  our 
actions  and  our  affections :  it  makes  us  citizens 
of  the  universe,  not  only  of  one  walled  city  at 
war  with  all  the  rest.  In  this  citizenship  of 
the  universe  consists  man's  true  freedom,  and 
his  liberation  from  the  thraldom  of  narr-^w 
hopes  and  fears. 

Thus,  to  sum  up  our  discussion  of  the  value 
of  philosophy  :  Philosophy  is  to  be  studied, 
not  for  the  sake  of  any  definite  answers  to  its 
questions,  since  no  definite  answers  can,  as  a 
rule,  be  known  to  be  true,  but  rather  for  the 
sake  of  the  questions  themselves  ;  because 
these  questions  enlarge  our  conception  of  what 


250    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

is  possible,  enrich  our  intellectual  imagination, 
and  diminish  the  dogmatic  assurance  which 
closes  the  mind  against  speculation ;  but  above 
all  because,  through  the  greatness  of  the 
universe  which  philosophy  contemplates,  the 
mind  also  is  rendered  great,  and  becomes 
capable  of  that  union  with  the  universe  which 
constitutes  its  highest  good. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL   NOTE 

The  student  who  wishes  to  acquire  an  elementary  know- 
ledge of  philosophy  will  find  it  both  easier  and  more 
profitable  to  read  some  of  the  works  of  the  great  philo- 
sophers than  to  attempt  to  derive  an  all-round  view 
from  hand-books.  The  following  are  specially  recom- 
mended : 

Plato  :  Republic,  especially  Books  VI  and  VTI.     Trans- 
lated by  Davies  and  Vauqhan.     Golden  Treasury 
Series. 
Descartes  :   Meditations.     Translated  by  Haldane  and 

Ross.     Cambridge  University  Press,  1911. 
Spinoza  :     Ethics.     Translated    by    Hale    White    and 

Amelia  Stirling. 
Leibniz  :    The  Monadology.     Translated  by  R.   Latta. 

Oxford,  1898. 
Berkeley  :  Three  Dialogues  between  Hylas  and  Philonous. 
Hume  :    Enquiry  concerning  Human  Understanding. 
Kant  :    Prolegomena  to  every  Future  Metaphysic. 

/ 


251 


INDEX 

The  interrogations  indicate  places  wliere  a  view  is 
discussed,  not  asserted. 


Absolute  idea,  222 
Acquaintance,  68,  69,  72  ff., 

170,  211 
vdth  Self  ?    78  ff. 
Act,  mental,  65 
Analytic,  128 
Appearance,  12,  24 
A  priori,  116, 118, 125, 127ff., 

1613. 
mental  ?    136 
Arithmetic,  130 
Association,  97,  101 

Being,  156 
Belief,  186  ff. 

instinctive,  37,  39 
Berkeley,    18,    22,    24,    56, 

60  ff.,  114,  149,  151 
Bismarck,  85,  89 
Bradley,  148 

Cat,  35,  36 

Causality,  107,  129 

Cause,  physical,  35 

Cogito,  28 

Coherence,  190-3,  218 

Colours,  11,  12,  13,  54-6, 
215 

Contemplation,  244 

Contradiction,  law  of ,  113, 
129 

Correspondence  of  sense- 
data  and  physical  ob- 
jects, 35,  38,  49,  52-3, 
59,  62 


Correspondence  of  belief  and 

fact,  190  ff. 
Critical  Philosophy,  126 

Deduction,  123 
Descartes,  27,  114,  235 
Description,  71,   74,   81  ff., 

170 
Divisibility,  infinite,  227-8 
Doubt,  27,  28,  40,  234 
Dreams,  30,  34-5,  172,  191 
Duration,  50 

Empiricists,  114,  134 

Error,    172,    186    ff.,    217, 
236 

Excluded  Middle,  113 

Existence,  155  : 

knowledge  of,  93,  116 

Experience  : 

immediate,  9,  23,  27,  61 
extended  by  descriptions, 
92,  94,  231 

Facts,  214 
Falsehood,  187  ff. 
definition  of,  201 

Generalisation,  empirical, 

121,  125,  166 
Geometry,  120,  130 

Hallucinations,  30,  172 

Hegel,  221  ff. 

Hume,  114,  129,  149,  151 


253 


254 


INDEX 


Ideas,  61  ff.,   '  35 

abstract,  76,  149 

innate,   114 

Platonic,  142  ff. 
Idealism,  58-71 

defined,  58 

grounds  of,  60  ff. 
Idealists,   56 
Identity,  law  of,  113 
Induction,  93-108,  123,  167 

principle  of,  103,  104,  175 
Inference,  logical  and  psy- 
chological, 209 
Infinity,  227  ff. 
Innate,  ideas  and  principles, 

114 
Introspection,  76 

Judgment,  195-7 

Kant,  126-41,  229 
Knowledge  : 

by  acquaintance  and  by 

description,  70,  72-92, 

170 
definition  of,  204  fT. 
derivative,  171,  207-9 
indubitable  ?    8,  235 
intuitive,     171,     174-85, 

210  ff,  232 
of  futme,  94  ff. 
of      general      principles, 

109-26,  131      68 
of  things  and  of  truths, 

69, 72,  170,  225 
of  universe,  40,  2''0,  241 
only   of   mental   things  ? 

64  ff. 
theory  of,  "0 
philosophical,  233,  239 

Laws,  general,  104,  115 
Leibniz,  22,  24,  50,  114,  148 


Light,    43-6 

Locke,  114 

Logic,  lUff.,  144,  192,  231 

Mathematics,  119,  130 
Matter,  18,  68 

existence  of,   19,  20,  22, 
26-41 

nature  of,  42-57 
Memory,  76,  180-4 
Microscope,  14 
Mind,  19,  81 

the  only  reality  ?   21 

what    is    in    the,    62  ff., 
154 
Monad,  148 
Monadism,  148 
Monism,  148 
Motion,  laws  of,  95,  99 

Nature  of  a  thing,  224 
Necessity,  121 

Objectof  apprehension,  65-'/ 
of  judgment,  197 

Particular,  145 
Perception,  177-9,  214 
Phenomena,  134 
Philosophy,  value  of,  237-50 

uncertainty  of,  239-44 
Physical  objects,  18,  30  ff., 

53,81,  132,  170 
Plato,  142  ff. 

Principles,  general,   109-26 
i   Probable  opinion,  217 
I   Probability,96, 102,105,  114 
I   Proper  names,  84  ff.,  145 
Propositions,    constituents 
of,  90 

Qualities,  149,  159 

Rationalists,  114,  134 


INDEX 


255 


Reality,  12,  17,  24 
Relations,    139,     148,     151, 

159,  224-6;  multiple,  194- 

7;  sense  of,  198 
Resemblance,  150,  160 
Russia,  Emperor  of,  70,  116 

Self,  78  ff. 

Self -consciousness,  77 

Self-evidence,  176  ff. 

degrees  of,   183,  215 

two  kinds  of,  212 
Sensation,  17,  132 
Sense-data,   17,  23,  27,  36, 
42,  73,  132,  213 

certainty  of,  28-30 
Shapes,  15 
Solipsism,  33-8 
ijpace,  45  ff.,  227  ff. 

Euclidean    and   non-Eu- 
clidean, 229 


Space,  physical,  47  ff. 
Spinoza,  147-8 
Subject,   197 
Swift,   122 

Thing  in  itself,  134 
Thought,  laws  of,  113,  136 
Time,  50  ff.,  135,  160,  227  ff. 
Touch,  16 
Truth,  186  ff. 
definition 
of,  201 

Uniformity  of  Nature,  98 
Universals,  76,  81,  142-57, 
231 
knowledge     of,     158-73, 

213 
not  mental,  151  ff. 

Verbs,  147  ff. 


THE  HOME  UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY    q/   Modern    Knowledge 

Is  made  up  of  absolutely  new  books  by  leading  authorities. 

The  editors  are  Professors  Gilbert  Murray,  H.  A.  L. 
Fisher,  W.  T.  Brewster,  and  J.  Arthur  Thomson. 


Cloth  bound,  good  paper,  clear  type,  256  pages,  per  vol- 
ume, bibliographies,  indices,  also  maps  or  illustrations 
where    needed.       Each    complete     CA     ,r»£3.-r«^ci 
and  sold  separately.     Per  volume.     *^^    CdlLS. 


LITERATURE  AND  ART. 

W^der 
Number'] 

73.  EURIPIDES  AND  HIS  AGE.  By  Gilbert  Murray,  Regius  Pro- 
fessor of  Greek,  Oxford. 

101.  DANTE.  By  Jefferson  B.  Fletclier,  Columbia  Universily.  An 
inierpretation  of  Dante  and  his  teaching  from  his  writings. 

2.  SHAKESPEARE.  By  John  Mase£eld.  "One  of  the  very  few  in- 
dispensable adjuncts  to  a  Shakespearean  Library," — Boston 
Transcripl. 

SI.  CHAUCER  AND  HIS  TIMES.  By  Grace  E.  Hadow,  Lecturer  Lady 
Margaret  Hall,  Oxford;   Late  Reader,  Bryn  Mawr. 

97.     MILTON.    By  John  Eailey. 

59.  DR.  JOHNSON  AND  HIS  CIRCLE.  By  John  Bailey.  Johnson's  life, 
character,  works,  and  friendships  are  surveyed;  and  there  is  a 
notable  vindication  of  the  "Genius  of  Boswell." 

83.  WILLIAM  MORRIS:  HIS  WORK  AND  INFLUENCE.  By  A. 
Glutton  Brock,  author  of  "Shelley:  The  Man  and  the  Poet." 
"William  Morris  believed  that  the  artist  should  toll  for  love  of  his 
work  rather  than  the  gain  of  his  employer,  and  so  he  turned  from 
making  works  of  art  to  remaking  society. 

75.    SHELLEY,  GODWIN  AND  THEIR  CIRCLE.    By  H.  N.  Brailsford. 

The  influence  of  the  French  Revolution  on  England. 


70.  ANCIENT  ART  AND  RITUAL  By  Jane  E.  Harrison,  LL.  D., 
D.  Litt.  "One  of  the  100  most  important  books  of  1913." — 
Nei»  Yot}(  Times  Review. 

45.  MEDIEVAL  ENGLISH  LITERATURE.  By  W.  P.  Ker,  Professor 
of  English  Literature,  University  College,  London.  "One  of  the 
soundest  scholars.  His  style  is  effective,  simple,  yet  never  dry." — 
The  Aihenaeum. 

87.  THE  RENAISSANCE.  By  Edith  Sicliel,  author  of  "Catherine  de 
Medici,"  "Men  and  Woman  of  the  French  Renaissance." 

89.     ELIZABETHAN    LITERATURE.     By    J.   M.    Robertson,    M.    P., 

author  of  "Montaigne  and  Shakespeare,"  "Modern  Humanists." 

27.  MODERN  ENGLISH  LITERATURE.  By  G.  H.  Mair.  From  Wyatt 
and  Surrey  to  Synge  and  Yeats.  "One  of  the  best  of  this  great 
series." — Chicago  Evening  Post. 

6L     THE  VICTORIAN  AGE  IN  LITERATURE.    By  G.  K.  CKesterton. 

40.  THE  ENGLISH  LANGUAGE.  By  L  P.  Ssnith.  A  concise  history 
of  its  origin  and  development. 

66.  WRITING  ENGLISH  PROSE.  By  William  T.  Brewster,  Professor 
of  English,  Columbia  University.  "Should  be  put  into  the  hands 
of  every  man  who  is  beginning  to  write  and  of  every  teacher  of 
English  that  has  brains  enough  to  understand  sense." — New  Yorl^ 
Sun. 

58.  THE  NEWSPAPER.  By  G.  Binney  Dibble.  The  first  full  account 
from  the  inside  of  newspaper  organization  as  it  exists  to-day. 

48.  GREAT  WRITERS  OF  AMERICA.  By  W.  P.  Trent  and  John 
Erskine,    Columbia  University. 

93.  AN  OUTLINE  OF  RUSSIAN  LITERATURE.  By  Maurice  Baring, 
author  of  "The  Russian  People,"  etc.  Tolstoi,  Tourgenieff, 
Dostoieffsky,  Pushkin  (the  father  of  Russian  Literature),  Salty- 
kov  (the    satirist,)    Leskov,   and  many   other  authors. 

3L  LANDMARKS  IN  FRENCH  LITERATURE.  By  G.  L  Strachey, 
Scholar  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  "It  is  difficult  to  imagine 
how  a  better  account  of  French  Literature  could  be  given  in  250 
pages." — London  Times. 

64.     THE  LITERATURE  OF  GERMANY.    By  J.  G.  Robertson. 

62.  PAINTERS  AND  PAINTING.  By  Sir  Frederick  Wedmore.  With 
16  half-tone   illustrations. 

38.  ARCHITECTURE.  By  Prof.  W.  R.  Lethafcy.  An  introduction  to 
the  hislory  and  theory  of  the  art  of  building. 


NATURAL  SCIENCE. 

68.  DISEASE  AND  ITS  CAUSES.  By  W.  T.  Conncilman,  M.  D., 
LL.  D.,  Professor  of  Pathology,  Harvard  University. 

85.  SEX.  By  J.  Arthur  Thompson  and  Patrick  Geddes,  joint  authors 
of  "The  Evolution  of  Sex." 

71.  PLANT  LIFE.  By  J.  B.  Farmer,  D.  Sc,  F.  R.  S.,  Professor  of  Bot- 
any in  the  Imperial  College  of  Science,  London.  This  very  fully 
illustrated  volume  contains  an  account  of  the  salient  features  of 
plant  form  and  function. 

63.  THE  ORIGIN  AND  NATURE  OF  LIFE.  By  Benjamin  M.  Moore, 
Professor  of  Bio-Chemistry,  Liverpool. 

90.  CHEMISTRY.  By  Raphael  Meldola,  F.  R.  S.,  Professor  of  Chem- 
istry, Finsbury  Technical  College.  Presents  the  way  in  which 
the  science  has  developed  and  the  stage  it  has  reached. 

53.  ELECTRICITY.  By  Gisbert  Kapp,  Professor  of  Electrical  En- 
gineering, University  of  Birmingham. 

54.  THE  MAKING  OF  THE  EARTH.  By  J.  W.  Gregory,  Professor  of 
Geology,  Glasgow  University.  38  maps  and  figures.  Describes 
the  origin  of  the  earth,  the  formation  and  changes  of  its  surface 
and  structure,  its  geological  history,  the  first  appearance  of  life, 
and  its  influence  upon  the  globe. 

56.  MAN:  A  HISTORY  OF  THE  HUMAN  BODY.  By  A.  Keith,  M.  D., 
Hunferian  Professor,  Royal  College  of  Surgeons,  London.  Shows 
how  the  human  body  developed. 

74.  NERVES.  By  David  Fraser  Harris,  M.  D.,  Professor  of  Physi- 
ology, Dalhousie  University,  Halifax.  Ejcplains  in  non-technical 
language  the  place  and  powers  of  the  nervous  system. 

21.  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  SCIENCE.  By  Prof.  J.  Arthur  Thomson, 
Science  Editor  of  the  Home  University  Library.  For  those  un- 
acquainted with  the  scientific  volumes  in  th«  series,  this  would 
prove  an  excellent  introduction. 

14.  EVOLUTION.  By  Prof.  J.  Arthur  Thomson  and  Prof.  Patrick 
Geddes.  Explains  to  the  layman  what  the  title  means  to  the 
scientific  world. 

23.  ASTRONOMY.  By  A.  R.  Hinks,  Chief  Assistant  at  the  Cam- 
bridge Observatory.  "Decidedly  original  in  substance,  and  the 
most  readable  and  informative  little  book  on  modern  astronomy 
we  have  seen  for  a  long  time." — Nature. 

24.  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.  By  Prof.  W.  F.  Barrett,  formerly  Pres- 
ident of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research. 

9.  THE  EVOLUTION  OF  PLANTS.  By  Dr.  D.  H.  Scott,  President 
of  the  Linnean  Society  of  London.  The  story  of  the  develop- 
ment of  flowering  plants,  from  the  earliest  zoological  times,  un- 
locked from  technical  language. 


43.  MATTER  AND  ENERGY.  By  F.  Soddy,  Lecturer  in_  Physical 
Chemistry  and  Radioactivity,  University  of  Glasgow.  "Brilliant. 
Can  hardly  be  surpassed.  Sure  to  attract  attention." — A'elP 
York  Sun. 

41.  PSYCHOLOGY,  THE  STUDY  OF  BEHAVIOUR.  By  William  Mc- 
Dougall,  of  Oxford.  A  well  digested  summary  of  the  essen- 
tials of  the  science  put  in  excellent  literary  form  by  a  leading 
authority. 

42.  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  PHYSIOLOGY.  By  Prof.  J.  G.  McKendrick. 
A  compact  statement  by  the  Emeritus  Professor  at  Glasgow,  for 
uninstructed  readers. 

37.  ANTHROPOLOGY.  By  R.  R.  Marett,  Reader  in  Social  An- 
thropology, Oxford.  Seeks  to  plot  out  and  sum  up  the  general 
series  of  changes,  bodily  and  mental,  undergone  by  man  in  the 
course  of  history.  "Excellent.  So  enthusiastic,  so  clear  and  witty, 
and  so  well  adapted  to  the  general  reader." — American  Librar}f 
Association  Boofflisi. 

17.  CRIME  AND  INSANITY.  By  Dr.  C.  Mercier,  author  of  "Test 
Book  of  Insanity,"  etc. 

12.     THE  ANIMAL  WORLD.    By  Prof.  F.  W.  Gamble. 

15.     INTRODUCTION   TO   MATHEMATICS.     By   A.   N.   Whitehead, 

author  of  "Universal  Algebra." 

PHILOSOPHY  AND  RELIGION. 


69.  A  HISTORY  OF  FREEDOM  OF  THOUGHT.  By  John  B.  Bury, 
M.  A.,  LL.  D.,  Regius  Professor  of  Modern  History  in  Cam- 
bridge University.  Summarizes  the  history  of  the  long  struggle 
between  authority  and  reason  and  of  the  emergence  of  the  prin- 
ciple that  coercion  of  opinion  is  a  mistake. 

98.  A  HISTORY  OF  PHILOSOPHY.  By  Clement  C.  J.  V/ebb, 
Oxford. 

35.     THE    PROBLEMS    OF     PHILOSOPHY.       By    Bertrand    Russell, 

Lecturer  and  Late  Fellow,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 

60.     COMPARATIVE    RELIGION.      By    Prof.    J.    Estlin    Carpenter. 

"One  of  the  few  authorities  on  this  subject  compares  all  the  re- 
ligions to  see  what  they  have  to  offer  on  the  great  themes  of  re- 
ligion."— Christian  Work  and  Evangelist. 

44.  BUDDHISM.  By  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids,  Lecturer  on  Indian  Philoso- 
phy, Manchester. 

46.     ENGLISH  SECTS:  A  HISTORY  OF  NONCONFORMITY.  By  W.B. 

Selbie,      Principal   of  Manchester  College,  Oxford. 


S5.    MISSIONS:   THE!R  RISE  AND  DEVELOPMENT.    By  Mrs.  Maa- 

dell  Creighton,  author  of  "History  of  England."  The  author 
seeks  to  prove  that  missions  have  done  more  to  civilize  the  world 
than  any  other  human  agency. 

52.  ETHICS.  By  G.  E.  Moore,  Lecturer  in  Moral  Science,  Cam-" 
bridge.  Discusses  what  is  right  and  what  is  wrong,  and  the  whys 
and  wherefores. 

65.    THE  LITERATURE  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.    By  George  F. 

Moore,  Professor  of  the  History  of  Religion,  Harvard  Uni- 
versity. "A  popular  work  of  the  highest  order.  Will  be  profit- 
able to  anybody  who  cares  enough  about  Bible  study  to  read  a 
serious  book  on  the  subject." — American  Journal  of  Theology, 

88.  RELIGIOUS  DEVELOPMENT  BETWEEN  OLD  AND  NEW  TESTA- 
MENTS. By  R.  H.  Charles,  Canon  of  Westminster.  Shows  how 
religious  and  ethical  thought  between  180  B.  C.  and  100  A.  D. 
grew  naturally  into  that  of  the  New  Testament. 

SO.    THE  MAKING  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.     By  B.  W.  Bacon, 

Professor  of  New  Testament  Criticism,  Yale.  An  authoritative 
summary  of  the  results  of  modern  critical  research  with  regard  to 
the  origins  of  the  New  Testament. 

SOCIAL  SCIENCE. 

91.  THE  NEGRO.  By  W.  E.  Burghardt  DuBois,  author  of  "Souls  of 
Black  Folks,"  etc.  A  history  of  the  black  man  in  Africa, 
America  or  wherever  else  his  presence  has  been  or  is  important. 

77.  CO-PARTNERSHIP  AND  PROFIT  SHARING.  By  AneurJn  Wil- 
liams.  Chairman,  Executive  Committee,  International  Co-opera- 
tive Alliance,  etc.  Explains  the  various  types  of  co-partnership 
or  profit-sharing,  or  both,  and  gives  details  of  the  arrangements 
now  in   force  in  many  of  the  great  industries. 

99.  POLITICAL  THOUGHT:  THE  UTILITARIANS.  FROM  BENT- 
HAM  TO  J.  S.  MILL.    By  William  L.  P.  Davidson. 

98.  POLITICAL  THOUGHT:  FROM  HERBERT  SPENCER  TO  THE 
PRESENT  DAY.    By  Ernest  Barker,  M.  A. 

79.  UNEMPLOYMENT.  By  A.  C.  Pigou,  M.  A.,  Professor  of  Political 
Economy  at  Cambridge.  The  meaning,  measurement,  distribution, 
and  effects  of  unemployment,  its  relation  to  wages,  trade  fluctua- 
tions, and  disputes,  and  Rome  proposals  nf  remedy  or  relief 


80.  COMMON-SENSE  IN  LAW.  By  Prof.  Paul  VJnogradoff.  D.  C.  L., 
LL.  D.  Social  and  Legal  Rules — Legal  Rights  and  Duties- 
Facts  and  Acts  in  Law — Legislation — Custom — Judicial  Prece- 
dents— Equity — The  Law  of  Nature. 

49.     ELEMENTS   OF   POLITICAL   ECONOMY.     B7   S.   J.    Chapman, 

Professor  of  Political  Economy  and  Dean  of  Faculty  of  Com- 
merce and  Administration,  University  of  Manchester. 

n.  THE  SCIENCE  OF  WEALTH.  By  J.  A.  Hobson,  author  of  "Prob- 
lems of  Poverty."  A  study  of  the  structure  and  working  of  the 
modern  business  world. 

1.  PARLIAMENT.  ITS  HISTORY,  CONSTITUTION,  AND  PRAC- 
TICE. By  Sir  Conrtenay  P.  Ilbert,  Clerk  of  the  House  of  Com- 
mons. 

16.  LIBERALISM.  By  Prof.  L.  T.  Hobhouse,  author  of  "Democracy 
and  Reaction."  A  masterly  philosophical  and  historical  review  of 
the  subject. 

5.  THE  STOCK  EXCHANGE.  By  F.  W.  Hirst,  Editor  of  the  London 
Economist.  Reveals  to  the  non-financial  mind  the  facts  about 
investment,  speculation,  and  the  other  terms  which  the  title  sug- 
gests. 

10.     THE    SOCIALIST    MOVEMENT.      By    J.    Ramsay    Macdonald. 

Chairman  of  the  British  Labor  Party. 

28.  THE    EVOLUTION    OF    INDUSTRY.      By    D.    H.    MacGregor, 

Professor  of  Political  Economy,  University  of  Leeds.  An  out- 
line of  the  recent  changes  that  have  given  us  the  present  conditions 
of  the  working  classes  and  the  principles  involved. 

29.  ELEMENTS  OF  ENGLISH  LAW.  By  W.  M.  Geldart,  Vinerian 
Professor  of  English  Law,  Oxford.  A  simple  statement  of  the 
basic  principles  of  the  English  legal  system  on  which  that  of  the 
United  States  is  based. 

32.  THE  SCHOOL:  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  EDU- 
CATION.  By  J.  J.  Findlay,  Professor  of  Education,  Manches- 
ter. Presents  the  history,  the  psychological  basis,  and  the  theory 
of  the  school  with  a  rare  power  of  summary  and  suggestion. 

6.  IRISH  NATIONALITY.  By  Mrs.  J.  R.  Green.  A  brilliant  account 
of  the  genius  and  mission  of  the  Irish  people.  "An  entrancing 
work,  and  1  would  advise  every  one  with  a  drop  of  Irish  blood 
in  his  veins  or  a  vein  of  Irish  sympathy  in  his  heart  to  read  it." — 
A^en>  Yorif  Time.*'  R'eviev. 


GENERAL  HISTORY  AND  GEOGRAPHY. 

33.  THE  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  By  A.  F.  PoUard,  Professor  of 
English  History,  University  of  London. 

95.  BELGIUM.  By  R.  C.  K.  Ensor,  Sometime  Scholar  of  Balliol 
College.  The  geographical,  linguistic,  historical,  artistic  and  lit- 
erary associations. 

100.  POLAND.  By  W,  Alison  Phillips,  University  of  Dublin.  The 
history  of  Poland  with  special  emphasis  upon  the  Polish  question 
of  the  present  day. 

34.  CANADA.    By  A.  G.  Bradley. 

72.     GERMANY  OF  TO-DAY.    By  Charles  Tower. 

78.  LATIN  AMERICA.  By  William  R.  Shepherd,  Professor  of  His- 
tory, Columbia.  With  maps.  The  historical,  artistic,  and  com- 
mercial development  of  the  Central  South  American  republics. 

18.  THE    OPENING-UP    OF    AFRICA.      By    Sir    H.    H.    Johnston. 

The  first  living  authority  on  the  subject  tells  how  and  why  the 
"native  races"  went  to  the  various  parts  of  Africa  Jind  summarizes 
its  exploration  and  colonization. 

19.  THE  CIVILIZATION  OF  CHINA.     By  H.  A.  Giles,    Professor  of 

Chinese,  Cambridge. 

36.     PEOPLES  AND  PROBLEMS  OF  INDIA.    By  Sir  T.  W.  Holderness. 

"  i  he  best  small  treatise  dealing  with  the  range  of  subjects  fairly 
indicated  by  the  title." — The  Dial. 

2S.  THE  DAWN  OF  HISTORY.  By  J.  L.  Myers,  Professor  of  Ancient 
History,  Oxford. 

92.     THE  ANCIENT  EAST.     By  D.   G.  Hogarth,  M.   A.,  F.  B.  A., 

F.  S.  A.  Connects  with  Prof.  Myers's  "DaviTi  of  History"  (No. 
26)  at  about  1000  B.  C.  and  reviews  the  history  of  Assyria, 
Babylon,  Cilicia,  Persia  and  Macedon. 
30.  ROME.  By  W.  Warde  Fowler,  author  of  "Social  Life  at  Rome." 
etc.  "A  masterly  sketch  of  Roman  character  and  what  it  did 
for  the  world." — London  Speclaior. 

13.  MEDIEVAL  EUROPE.  By  H.  W.  C.  Davis,  Fellow  at  Balliol  Col- 
lege, Oxford,  author  of  "Charlemagne,"  etc. 

3.     THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION.    By  HiUaire  Belloc. 
57.     NAPOLEON.     By  H.  A.  L  Fisher,    Vice-Chancellor  of  Sheffield 
University.     Author  of  "The  Republican  Tradition  in  Europe." 

20.  flISTORY  OF  OUR  TIME  (1885-lSll).  By  C.  P.  Gooch, 
A  "moving  picture"  of  the  world  since  1885. 

22.  THE  PAPACY  AND  MODERN  TIMES.  By  Rev.  William  Barry, 
p.  D.,  author  of  "The  Papal  Monarchy,"  etc.  The  story  of  the 
rise  and  fall  of  the  Temporal  Power. 


4.    A  SHORT  HISTORY  OF  WAR  AND  PEACE.     By  G.  H.  Perm, 

author  of  "Russia  in  Revolulion,"  etc. 
94.  THE  NAVY  AND  SEA  POWER.  By  David  Hannay,  author  of 
"Short  History  of  the  Royal  Navy,"  etc.  A  brief  history  of  the 
navies,  sea  power,  and  ship  growth  of  all  nations,  including  the 
rise  and  decline  of  America  on  the  sea,  and  explaining  the 
present  British  supremacy  thereon. 

8.     POLAR  EXPLORATION.     By  Dr.  W.  S.  Bruce,      Leader    of    the 
"Scotia"  expedition.     Emphasizes  the  results  of  the  expeditions. 

51.  MASTER  MARINERS.  By  John  R.  Spears,  author  of  "The  His- 
tory of  Our  Navy,"  etc.  A  history  of  sea  craft  adventure  from 
the  earliest  times. 

86.     EXPLORATION  OF  THE  ALPS.    By  Arnold  Lnnn,  M.  A. 
7.     MODERN  GEOGRAPHY.    By  Dr.  Marion  Newbigin,     Shows  the  re- 
lation of   physical    features  to  livinf;   things  and   to  some   of  the 
chief  institutions  of  civilization. 

76.  THE  OCEAN.  A  GENERAL  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  SCIENCE  OF 
THE  SEA.  By  Sir  John  Murray,  K.  C.  B.,  Naturalist  H.  M.  S. 
"Challenger,"  1872-1876,  joint  author  of  "The  Depths  of  the 
Ocean,"  etc. 

84.  THE  GROWTH  OF  EUROPE.  By  Granville  Cole,  Professor  of 
Geology,  Royal  College  of  Science,  Ireland.  A  study  of  the 
geology  and  physical  geography  in  connection  with  the  political 
geography. 

AMERICAN  HISTORY. 

47.  THE  COLONIAL  PERIOD  (1607-1766).  By  Charles  McLean  An- 
drews,     Professor  of  American  History,  Yale. 

82.  THE  WARS  BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  AMERICA  (17S3-18I5). 
By  Theodore  C.  Smith,  Professor  of  American  History,  Wil- 
liams College.  A  history  of  the  period,  with  especial  emphasis 
on  The  Revolution  and  The  War  of  1812. 

67.  FROM  JEFFERSON  TO  LINCOLN  (1815-1860).  By  William 
MacDonald,  Professor  of  History,  Brown  University.  The 
author  makes  the  history  of  this  period  circulate  about  constitu- 
tional ideas  and  slavery  sentiment. 

25.  THE  CIVIL  WAR  (1854-1865.)  By  Frederic  L.  Paxson, 
Professor  of  American  History,  University  of  Wisconsin. 

39.  RECONSTRUCTION  AND  UNION  (1865-1912).  By  Paul  Leiand 
Haworth.     A  History  of  the  United  States  in  our  own  times. 

OTHER  VOLUMES  IN  PREPARATION 

HENRY  HOLT  AND  COMPANY 

34  West   33d  Sh-eet  New  York
