HOME  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY 
OF  MODERN  KNOWLEDGE 

No.  S6 

Editors : 

HERBERT    FISHER,  M.A.,  F.B.A. 
Prof.  GILBERT  MURRAY,  Litt.D., 

LL.D.,  F.B.A. 
Prof.  J.   ARTHUR    THOMSON,  M.A. 
Prof.  W.LLIAM  T.  BREWSTER,  M.A. 


A  complete  classified  list  of  the  volumes  tf  The 
Home  University  Library  already  published 
will  be  found  at  the  back  of  this  book. 


THE  PROBLEMS 
OF  PHILOSOPHY 


BY 

BERTRAND    RUSSELL 

M.A.,    F.R.8. 

LECTURER   AND    LATE    FELLOW   OF  TRINITY    COLLEGE 
CAMBRIDGE 


NEW   YORK 
HENRY   HOLT  AND    COMPANY 

LONDON 
WILLIAMS   AND    N  ORG  ATE 


PREFACE 

In  the  following  pages,  I  have  confined 
myself  in  the  main  to  those  problems  of 
philosophy  in  regard  to  which  I  thought 
it  possible  to  say  something  positive  and 
constructive,  since  merely  negative  criticism 
seemed  out  of  place.  For  this  reason,  theory 
of  knowledge  occupies  a  larger  space  than 
metaphysics  in  the  present  volume,  and  some 
topics  much  discussed  by  philosophers  are 
treated  very  briefly,  if  at  all. 

I  have  derived  valuable  assistance  from 
unpublished  writings  of  Mr.  G.  E.  Moore  and 
Mr.  J.  M.  Keynes  :  from  the  former,  as  re- 
gards the  relations  of  sense-data  to  physical 
objects,  and  from  the  latter  as  regards  prob- 
ability and  induction.  I  have  also  profited 
greatly  by  the  criticisms  and  suggestions  of 
Professor  Gilbert  Murray. 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER  PAGE 

I     APPEARANCE   AND   REALITY               .            .  9 

II     THE    EXISTENCE    OF    MATTER           .             .  26 

III  THE   NATURE   OF   MATTER      ...  42 

IV  IDEALISM 58 

V     KNOWLEDGE     BY     ACQUAINTANCE     AND 

KNOWLEDGE    BY    DESCRIPTION    .             .  72 

VI      ON   INDUCTION  .....  93 

Vn     ON      OUR      KNOWLEDGE      OF      GENERAL 

PRINCIPLES         .....  109 

VIII     HOW  A  PRIORI  KNOWLEDGE    IS   POSSIBLE  127 

IX     THE   WORLD   OF   UNIVERSALS  .  .142 

X     ON  OUR  KNOWLEDGE   OF  UNIVERSALS    .  158 

XI     ON  INTUITIVE  KNOWLEDGE  .  .  .174 

vii 


viii  CONTENTS 

OHAPTEB  PAOE 

XII    TRUTH    AND    FALSEHOOD       .  .  .      186 


Xin     KNOWLEDGE,     ERROR,     AND     PROBABLE 

OPINION               .....  204 

XIV     THE    LIMITS    OF    PHILOSOPHICAL    KNOW- 
LEDGE       220 

XV     THE  VALUE  OF  PHILOSOPHY              .            .  237 
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE          .             .            .251 

INDEX 253 


THE 
PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

CHAPTER    I 

APPEARANCE   AND   REALITY 

Is  there  any  knowledge  in  the  world  which 
is  so  certain  that  no  reasonable  man  could 
doubt  it  ?  This  question,  which  at  first  sight 
might  not  seem  difficult,  is  really  one  of  the 
most  difficult  that  can  be  asked.  When  we 
have  realised  the  obstacles  in  the  way  of  a 
straightforward  and  confident  answer,  we 
shall  be  well  launched  on  the  study  of  philo- 
sophy— for  philosophy  is  merely  the  attempt 
to  answer  such  ultimate  questions,  not 
carelessly  and  dogmatically,  as  we  do  in 
ordinary  life  and  even  in  the  sciences,  but 
critically,  after  exploring  all  that  makes  such 

9 


10    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

queitions  puzzling,  and  after  realising  all 
the  vagueness  and  confusion  that  underlie 
our  ordinary  ideas. 

In  daily  life,  we  assume  as  certain  many 
things  which,  on  a  closer  scrutiny,  are  found 
to  be  so  full  of  apparent  contradictions  that 
only  a  great  amount  of  thought  enables  us 
to  know  what  it  is  that  we  really  may  believe. 
In  the  search  for  certainty,  it  is  natural  to 
begin  with  our  present  experiences,  and  in 
some  sense,  no  doubt,  knowledge  is  to  be 
derived  from  them.  But  any  statement  as 
to  what  it  is  that  our  immediate  experiences 
make  us  know  is  very  likely  to  be  wrong.  It 
seems  to  me  that  I  am  now  sitting  in  a  chair, 
at  a  table  of  a  certain  shape,  on  which  I  see 
sheets  of  paper  with  writing  or  print.  By 
turning  my  head  I  see  out  of  the  window 
buildings  and  clouds  and  the  sun.  I  believe 
that  the  sun  is  about  ninety-three  million  miles 
from  the  earth ;  that  it  is  a  hot  globe  many 
times  bigger  than  the  earth ;  that,  owing  to 
the  earth's  rotation,  it  rises  every  morning, 
and  will  continue  to  do  so  for  an  indefinite 
time  in   the  future.     I  believe  that,  if  any 


APPEARANCE  AND  REALITY    11 

other  normal  person  comes  into  my  room,  he 
will  see  the  same  chairs  and  tables  and  books 
and  papers  as  I  see,  and  that  the  table  which 
I  see  is  the  same  as  the  table  which  I  feel 
pressing  against  my  arm.  All  this  seems  to 
be  so  evident  as  to  be  hardly  worth  stating, 
except  in  answer  to  a  man  who  doubts 
whether  I  know  anything.  Yet  all  this  may 
be  reasonably  doubted,  and  all  of  it  requires 
much  careful  discussion  before  we  can  be 
sure  that  we  have  stated  it  in  a  form  that  is 
wholly  true. 

To  make  our  difficulties  plain,  let  us  con- 
centrate attention  on  the  table.  To  the  eye 
it  is  oblong,  brown  and  shiny,  to  the  touch 
it  is  smooth  and  cool  and  hard ;  when  I 
tap  it,  it  gives  out  a  wooden  sound.  Any  one 
else  who  sees  and  feels  and  hears  the  table 
will  agree  with  this  description,  so  that  it 
might  seem  as  if  no  difficulty  would  arise ; 
but  as  soon  as  we  try  to  be  more  precise  our 
troubles  begin.  Although  I  believe  that  the 
table  is  **  really  "  of  the  same  colour  all  over, 
the  parts  that  reflect  the  light  look  much 
brighter   than   the   other   parts,    and   some 


12    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

parts  look  white  because  of  reflected  light. 
I  know  that,  if  I  move,  the  parts  that  rC' 
fleet  the  light  will  be  different,  so  that  the 
apparent  distribution  of  colours  on  the  table 
will  change.  It  follows  that  if  several  people 
are  looking  at  the  table  at  the  same  moment, 
no  two  of  them  will  see  exactly  the  same 
distribution  of  colours,  because  no  two 
can  see  it  from  exactly  the  same  point  of 
view,  and  any  change  in  the  point  of  view 
makes  some  change  in  the  way  the  light  is 
reflected. 

For  most  practical  purposes  these  differ- 
ences are  unimportant,  but  to  the  painter 
they  are  all-important :  the  painter  has  to 
unlearn  the  habit  of  thinking  that  things 
seem  to  have  the  colour  which  common  sense 
says  they  "  really  "  have,  and  to  learn  the 
habit  of  seeing  things  as  they  appear.  Here 
we  have  already  the  beginning  of  one  of 
the  distinctions  that  cause  most  trouble  in 
philosophy — the  distinction  between  "  ap- 
pearance "  and  "  reality,"  between  what 
things  seem  to  be  and  what  they  are.  The 
painter  wants  to  know  what  tilings  seem  to 


APPEARANCE  AND   REALITY    13 

be,  the  practical  man  and  the  philosopher 
want  to  know  what  they  are ;  but  the  philo- 
sopher's wish  to  know  this  is  stronger  than 
the  practical  man's,  and  is  more  troubled  by 
knowledge  as  to  the  difficulties  of  answering 
the  question. 

To  return  to  the  table.  It  is  evident  from 
what  we  have  found,  that  there  is  no  colour 
which  pre-eminently  appears  to  be  the  colour 
of  the  table,  or  even  of  any  one  particular 
part  of  the  table — it  appears  to  be  of  different 
colours  from  different  points  of  view,  and 
there  is  no  reason  for  regarding  some  of 
these  as  more  really  its  colour  than  others. 
And  we  know  that  even  from  a  given  point 
of  view  the  colour  will  seem  different  by 
artificial  light,  or  to  a  colour-blind  man,  or 
to  a  man  wearing  blue  spectacles,  while  in 
the  dark  there  will  be  no  colour  at  all,  though 
to  touch  and  hearing  the  table  will  be  un- 
changed. Thus  colour  is  not  something  which 
is  inherent  in  the  table,  but  something  de- 
pending upon  the  table  and  the  spectator 
and  the  way  the  light  falls  on  the  table. 
When,  in  ordinary  life,  we  speak  of  the  colour 


14    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

of  the  table,  we  only  mean  the  sort  of  colour 
which  it  will  seem  to  have  to  a  normal 
spectator  from  an  ordinary  point  of  view 
under  usual  conditions  of  light.  But  the 
other  colours  which  appear  under  other 
conditions  have  just  as  good  a  right  to  be 
considered  real ;  and  therefore,  to  avoid 
favouritism,  we  are  compelled  to  deny  that, 
in  itself,  the  table  has  any  one  particular 
colour. 

The  same  thing  applies  to  the  texture. 
With  the  naked  eye  one  can  see  the  grain, 
but  otherwise  the  table  looks  smooth  and 
even.  If  we  looked  at  it  through  a  micro- 
scope, we  should  see  roughnesses  and  hills 
and  valleys,  and  all  sorts  of  differences  that 
are  imperceptible  to  the  naked  eye.  Which 
of  these  is  the  "real"  table?  We  are  natu- 
rally tempted  to  say  that  what  we  see 
through  the  microscope  is  more  real,  but 
Lliat  in  turn  would  be  changed  by  a  still 
more  powerful  microscope.  If,  then,  we 
cannot  trust  what  we  see  with  the  naked 
eye,  why  should  we  trust  what  we  see 
through  a  microscope  ?     Thus,    again,    the 


APPEARANCE   AND   REALITY     15 

confidence  in  our  senses  with   which  we  be- 
gan deserts  us. 

The  sha'pe  of  the  table  is  no  better.  We 
are  all  in  the  habit  of  judging  as  to  the 
"  real  "  shapes  of  things,  and  we  do  this  so 
unreflectingly  that  we  come  to  think  we 
actually  see  the  real  shapes.  But,  in  fact, 
as  we  all  have  to  learn  if  we  try  to  draw,  a 
given  thing  looks  different  in  shape  from 
every  different  point  of  view.  If  our  table 
is  "  really  "  rectangular,  it  will  look,  from 
almost  all  points  of  view,  as  if  it  had  two 
acute  angles  and  two  obtuse  angles.  If 
opposite  sides  are  parallel,  they  will  look  as 
if  they  converged  to  a  point  away  from  the 
spectator  ;  if  they  are  of  equal  length,  they 
will  look  as  if  the  nearer  side  were  longer. 
All  these  things  are  not  commonly  noticed 
in  looking  at  a  table,  because  experience  has 
taught  us  to  construct  the  "  real "  shape  from 
the  apparent  shape,  and  the  "  real  "  shape 
is  what  interests  us  as  practical  men.  But 
the  "  real  "  shape  is  not  what  we  see  ;  it  is 
something  inferred  from  what  we  see.  And 
what  we  see  is  constantly  changing  in  shape 


16    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

as  we  move  about  the  room  ;  so  that  here 
again  the  senses  seem  not  to  give  us  the  truth 
about  the  table  itself,  but  only  about  the 
appearance  of  the  table. 

Similar  difficulties  arise  when  we  consider 
the  sense  of  touch.  It  is  true  that  the  table 
always  gives  us  a  sensation  of  hardness,  and 
we  feel  that  it  resists  pressure.  But  the 
sensation  we  obtain  depends  upon  how  hard 
we  press  the  table  and  also  upon  what  part 
of  the  body  we  press  with  ;  thus  the  various 
sensations  due  to  various  pressures  or  various 
parts  of  the  body  cannot  be  supposed  to 
reveal  directly  any  definite  property  of  the 
table,  but  at  most  to  be  sig7is  of  some 
property  which  perhaps  causes  all  the  sen- 
sations, but  is  not  actually  apparent  in  any 
of  them.  And  the  same  applies  still  more 
obviously  to  the  sounds  which  can  be  elicited 
by  rapping  the  table. 

Thus  it  becomes  evident  that  the  real  table, 
if  there  is  one,  is  not  the  same  as  what  we 
immediately  experience  by  sight  or  touch  or 
hearing.  The  real  table,  if  there  is  one,  is 
not  immediately  known  to  us  at  all,  but  must 


APPEARANCE  AND   REALITY    17 

be  an  inference  from  what  is  immediately 
known.  Hence,  two  very  difficult  questions 
at  once  arise  ;  namely,  (1)  Is  there  a  real  table 
&t  all  ?  (2)  If  so,  what  sort  of  object  can  it 
be? 

It  will  help  us  in  considering  these  questions 
to  have  a  few  simple  terms  of  which  the 
meaning  is  definite  and  clear.  Let  us  give 
the  name  of  "  sense-data  "  to  the  things  that 
are  immediately  known  in  sensation :  such 
things  as  colours,  sounds,  smells,  hardnesses, 
roughnesses,  and  so  on.  We  shall  give  the 
name  "  sensation "  to  the  experience  of 
being  immediately  aware  of  these  things. 
Thus,  whenever  we  see  a  colour,  we  have  a 
sensation  of  the  colour,  but  the  colour  itself 
is  a  sense-datum,  not  a  sensation.  The 
colour  is  that  of  which  we  are  immediately 
aware,  and  the  awareness  itself  is  the  sensation. 
It  is  plain  that  if  we  are  to  know  anything 
about  the  table,  it  must  be  by  means  of  the 
sense-data — brown  colour,  oblong  shape, 
smoothness,  etc. — which  we  associate  with 
the  table  ;  but  for  the  reasons  which  have 
been  given,  we  cannot  say  that  the  table  is  the 


18    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

sense-data,  or  even  that  the  sense-data  are 
directly  properties  of  the  table.  Thus  a 
problem  arises  as  to  the  relation  of  the  sense- 
data  to  the  real  table,  supposing  there  is 
such  a  thing. 

The  real  table,  if  it  exists,  we  will  call  a 
"  physical  object."  Thus  we  have  to  consider 
the  relation  of  sense-data  to  physical  objects. 
The  collection  of  all  physical  objects  is  called 
"  matter."  Thus  our  two  questions  may 
be  re-stated  as  follows  :  (1)  Is  there  any 
such  thing  as  matter  ?  (2)  If  so,  what  is  its 
nature  ? 

The  philosopher  who  first  brought  pro- 
minently forward  the  reasons  for  regarding 
the  immediate  objects  of  our  senses  as  not 
existing  independently  of  us  was  Bishop 
Berkeley  (1685-1753).  His  Three  Dialogues 
between  Hylas  and  Philonous,  in  Opposition 
to  Sceptics  and  Atheists,  undertake  to  prove 
that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  matter  at  all, 
and  that  the  world  consists  of  nothing  but 
minds  and  their  ideas.  Hylas  has  hitherto 
believed  in  matter,  but  he  is  no  match  for 
Philonous,  who  mercilessly  drives  him  into 


APPEARANCE  AND  REALITY    19 

contradictions  and  paradoxes,  and  makes 
his  own  denial  of  matter  seem,  in  the  end, 
as  if  it  were  almost  common  sense.  The 
arguments  employed  are  of  very  different 
value :  some  are  important  and  sound, 
others  are  confused  or  quibbling.  But 
Berkeley  retains  the  merit  of  having  shown 
that  the  existence  of  matter  is  capable  of 
being  denied  without  absurdity,  and  that  if 
there  are  any  things  that  exist  independently 
of  us  they  cannot  be  the  immediate  objects 
of  our  sensations. 

There  are  two  different  questions  involved 
when  we  ask  whether  matter  exists,  and  it  is 
important  to  keep  them  clear.  We  commonly 
mean  by  "  matter "  something  which  is 
opposed  to  "  mind,"  something  which  we 
think  of  as  occupying  space  and  as  radically 
incapable  of  any  sort  of  thought  or  conscious- 
ness. It  is  chiefly  in  this  sense  that  Berkeley 
denies  matter  ;  that  is  to  say,  he  does  not 
deny  that  the  sense-data  which  we  commonly 
take  as  signs  of  the  existence  of  the  table  are 
really  signs  of  the  existence  of  something  inde- 
pendent of  us,  but  he  does  deny  that  this  some^ 


20    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

thing  is  non-mental,  that  it  is  neither  mind 
nor  ideas  entertained  by  some  mind.  He 
admits  that  there  must  be  something  which 
continues  to  exist  when  we  go  out  of  the  room 
or  shut  our  eyes,  and  that  what  we  call 
seeing  the  table  does  really  give  us  reason 
for  believing  in  something  which  persists 
even  when  we  are  not  seeing  it.  But  he 
thinks  that  this  something  cannot  be  radi- 
cally different  in  nature  from  what  we  see,  and 
cannot  be  independent  of  seeing  altogether, 
though  it  must  be  independent  of  our  seeing. 
He  is  thus  led  to  regard  the  "  real  "  table  as 
an  idea  in  the  mind  of  God.  Such  an  idea 
has  the  required  permanence  and  independence 
of  ourselves,  without  being — as  matter  would 
otherwise  be — something  quite  unknowable, 
in  the  sense  that  we  can  only  infer  it,  and 
can  never  be  directly  and  immediately  aware 
of  it. 

Other  philosophers  since  Berkeley  have 
also  held  that,  although  the  table  does  not 
depend  for  its  existence  upon  being  seen  by 
me,  it  does  depend  upon  being  seen  (or 
otherwise  apprehended  in  sensation)  by  some 


APPEARANCE   AND   REALITY    21 

mind — not  necessarily  the  mind  of  God, 
but  more  often  the  whole  collective  mind  of 
the  universe.  This  they  hold,  as  Berkeley 
does,  chiefly  because  they  think  there  can 
be  nothing  real — or  at  any  rate  nothing 
known  to  be  real — except  minds  and  their 
thoughts  and  feelings.  We  might  state  the 
argument  by  which  they  support  their  view 
in  some  such  way  as  this :  "  Whatever 
can  be  thought  of  is  an  idea  in  the 
mind  of  the  person  thinking  of  it ;  therefore 
nothing  can  be  thought  of  except  ideas  in 
minds ;  therefore  anything  else  is  incon- 
ceivable, and  what  is  inconceivable  cannot 
exist." 

Such  an  argument,  in  my  opinion,  is 
fallacious  ;  and  of  course  those  who  advance 
it  do  not  put  it  so  shortly  or  so  crudely.  But 
whether  valid  or  not,  the  argument  has  been 
very  widely  advanced  in  one  form  or  another ; 
and  very  many  philosophers,  perhaps  a 
majority,  have  held  that  there  is  nothing  real 
except  minds  and  their  ideas.  Such  philo- 
sophers are  called  "  idealists."  When  they 
come  to  explaining  matter,  they  either  say, 


22    THE   PROBLEMS   OF  PHILOSOPHY 

like  Berkeley,  that  matter  is  really  nothing 
but  a  collection  of  ideas,  or  they  say,  like 
Leibniz  (1646-1716),  that  what  appears  as 
matter  is  really  a  collection  of  more  or  less 
rudimentary  minds. 

But  these  philosophers,  though  they  deny 
matter  as  opposed  to  mind,  nevertheless,  in 
another  sense,  admit  matter.  It  will  be 
remembered  that  we  asked  two  questions  ; 
namely,  (1)  Is  there  a  real  table  at  all  ?  (2)  If 
so,  what  sort  of  object  can  it  be  ?  Now 
both  Berkeley  and  Leibniz  admit  that  there 
is  a  real  table,  but  Berkeley  says  it  is  certain 
ideas  in  the  mind  of  God,  and  Leibniz  says 
it  is  a  colony  of  souls.  Thus  both  of  them 
answer  our  first  question  in  the  affirmative, 
and  only  diverge  from  the  views  of  ordi- 
nary mortals  in  their  answer  to  our  second 
question.  In  fact,  almost  all  philosophers 
seem  to  be  agreed  that  there  is  a  real  table  : 
they  almost  all  agree  that,  however  much 
our  sense-data — colour,  shape,  smoothness, 
etc. — may  depend  upon  us,  yet  their  oc- 
currence is  a  sign  of  something  existing 
independently    of    us,    something    differing, 


APPEARANCE   AND   REALITY    23 

perhaps,  completely  from  our  sense-data, 
and  yet  to  be  regarded  as  causing  those 
sense-data  whenever  we  are  in  a  suitable 
relation  to  the  real  table. 

Now  obviously  this  point  in  which  the 
philosophers  are  agreed — the  view  that  there 
is  a  real  table,  whatever  its  nature  may  be 
— is  vitally  important,  and  it  will  be  worth 
while  to  consider  what  reasons  there  are  for 
accepting  this  view  before  we  go  on  to  the 
further  question  as  to  the  nature  of  the  real 
table.  Our  next  chapter,  therefore,  will  be 
concerned  with  the  reasons  for  supposing 
that  there  is  a  real  table  at  all. 

Before  we  go  farther  it  will  be  well  to 
consider  for  a  moment  what  it  is  that  we 
have  discovered  so  far.  It  has  appeared 
that,  if  we  take  any  common  object  of  the 
sort  that  is  supposed  to  be  known  by  the 
senses,  what  the  senses  immediately  tell  us 
is  not  the  truth  about  the  object  as  it  is 
apart  from  us,  but  only  the  truth  about 
certain  sense-data  which,  so  far  as  we  can 
see,  depend  upon  the  relations  between  us 
and  the  object.     Thus  what  we  directly  see 


24    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

and  feel  is  merely  "  appearance,"  which  we 
believe  to  be  a  sign  of  some  "  reality " 
behind.  But  if  the  reality  is  not  what 
appears,  have  we  any  means  of  knowing 
whether  there  is  any  reality  at  all  ?  And  if 
so,  have  we  any  means  of  finding  out  what 
it  is  like  ? 

Such  questions  are  bewildering,  and  it  is 
difficult  to  know  that  even  the  strangest 
hypotheses  may  not  be  true.  Thus  our 
familiar  table,  which  has  roused  but  the 
slightest  thoughts  in  us  hitherto,  has  become 
a  problem  full  of  surprising  possibilities. 
The  one  thing  we  know  about  it  is  that  it 
is  not  what  it  seems.  Beyond  this  modest 
result,  so  far,  we  have  the  most  complete 
liberty  of  conjecture.  Leibniz  tells  us  it 
is  a  community  of  souls  ;  Berkeley  tells  us 
it  is  an  idea  in  the  mind  of  God  ;  sober 
science,  scarcely  less  wonderful,  tells  us  it 
is  a  vast  collection  of  electric  charges  in 
violent  motion. 

Among  these  surprising  possibilities,  doubt 
suggests  that  perhaps  there  is  no  table  at  all. 
Philosophy,    if   it   cannot   answer   so   many 


APPEARANCE   AND   REALITY      25 

questions  as  we  could  wish,  has  at  least  the 
power  of  asking  questions  which  increase 
the  interest  of  the  world,  and  show  the 
strangeness  and  wonder  lying  just  below  the 
surface  even  in  the  commonest  things  of 
daily  life. 


CHAPTER    II 

THE   EXISTENCE   OF   MATTER 

In  this  chapter  we  have  to  ask  ourselves 
whether,  in  any  sense  at  all,  there  is  such  a 
thing  as  matter.  Is  there  a  table  which 
has  a  certain  intrinsic  nature,  and  continues 
to  exist  when  I  am  not  looking,  or  is  the  table 
merely  a  product  of  my  imagination,  a  dream- 
table  in  a  very  prolonged  dream  ?  This 
question  is  of  the  greatest  importance.  For 
if  we  cannot  be  sure  of  the  independent 
existence  of  objects,  we  cannot  be  sure  of 
the  independent  existence  of  other  people's 
bodies,  and  therefore  still  less  of  other  people's 
minds,  since  we  have  no  grounds  for  be- 
lieving in  their  minds  except  such  as  are 
derived  from  observing  their  bodies.  Thus 
if  we  cannot  be  sure  of  the  independent 
existence  of  objects,  we  shall  be  left  alone 

36 


THE   EXISTENCE   OF  MATTER      27 

in  a  desert — it  may  be  that  the  whole 
outer  world  is  nothing  but  a  dream,  and 
that  we  alone  exist.  This  is  an  uncomfort- 
able possibility  ;  but  although  it  cannot  be 
strictly  proved  to  be  false,  there  is  not  the 
slightest  reason  to  suppose  that  it  is  true. 
In  this  chapter  we  have  to  see  why  this  is 
the  case. 

Before  we  embark  upon  doubtful  matters, 
let  us  try  to  find  some  more  or  less  fixed  point 
from  which  to  start.  Although  we  are 
doubting  the  physical  existence  of  the  table, 
we  are  not  doubting  the  existence  of  the 
sense-data  which  made  us  think  there  was  a 
table  ;  we  are  not  doubting  that,  while  we 
look,  a  certain  colour  and  shape  appear  to 
us,  and  while  we  press,  a  certain  sensation  of 
hardness  is  experienced  by  us.  All  this, 
which  is  psychological,  we  are  not  calling  in 
question.  In  fact,  whatever  else  may  be 
doubtful,  some  at  least  of  our  immediate 
experiences  seem  absolutely  certain. 

Descartes  (1596-1650),  the  founder  of 
modern  philosophy,  invented  a  method  which 
may  still  be  used  with  profit — the  method  of 


28    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

systematic  doubt.  He  determined  that  he 
would  believe  nothing  which  he  did  not  see 
quite  clearly  and  distinctly  to  be  true.  What- 
ever he  could  bring  himself  to  doubt,  he  would 
doubt,  until  he  saw  reason  for  not  doubting 
it.  By  applying  this  method  he  gradually 
became  convinced  that  the  only  existence  of 
which  he  could  be  quite  certain  was  his  own. 
He  imagined  a  deceitful  demon,  who  pre- 
sented unreal  things  to  his  senses  in  a 
perpetual  phantasmagoria ;  it  might  be  very 
improbable  that  such  a  demon  existed,  but 
still  it  was  possible,  and  therefore  doubt 
concerning  things  perceived  by  the  senses 
was  possible. 

But  doubt  concerning  his  own  existence 
was  not  possible,  for  if  he  did  not  exist,  no 
demon  could  deceive  him.  If  he  doubted, 
he  must  exist ;  if  he  had  any  experiences 
whatever,  he  must  exist.  Thus  his  own  ex- 
istence was  an  absolute  certainty  to  him. 
"  I  think,  therefore  I  am,"  he  said  {Cogiio, 
ergo  sum) ;  and  on  the  basis  of  this  certainty 
he  set  to  work  to  build  up  again  the  world 
of  knowledge  which  his  doubt  had  laid  in 


THE  EXISTENCE  OF  MATTER      29 

ruins.  By  inventing  the  method  of  doubt, 
and  by  showing  that  subjective  things  are 
the  most  certain,  Descartes  performed  a 
great  service  to  philosophy,  and  one  which 
makes  him  still  useful  to  all  students  of 
the  subject. 

But  some  care  is  needed  in  using  Des- 
cartes' argument.  "  /  think,  therefore  / 
am "  says  rather  more  than  is  strictly  cer- 
tain. It  might  seem  as  though  we  were 
quite  sure  of  being  the  same  person  to-day 
as  we  were  yesterday,  and  this  is  no  doubt 
true  in  some  sense.  But  the  real  Self  is 
as  hard  to  arrive  at  as  the  real  table,  and 
does  not  seem  to  have  that  absolute,  con- 
vincing certainty  that  belongs  to  particular 
experiences.  When  I  look  at  my  table  and 
see  a  certain  brown  colour,  what  is  quite  cer- 
tain at  once  is  not  "  /  am  seeing  a  brown 
colour,"  but  rather,  "  a  brown  colour  is  being 
seen."  This  of  course  involves  something 
(or  somebody)  which  (or  who)  sees  the  brown 
colour ;  but  it  does  not  of  itself  involve  that 
more  or  less  permanent  person  whom  we  call 
"  I.'-     So  far  as  immediate  certainty  goes. 


30    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

it  might  be  that  the  something  which 
sees  the  brown  colour  is  quite  momentary, 
and  not  the  same  as  the  something  which 
has  some  different  experience  the  next 
moment. 

Thus  it  is  our  particular  thoughts  and 
feelings  that  have  primitive  certainty.  And 
this  applies  to  dreams  and  hallucinations  as 
well  as  to  normal  perceptions :  when  we 
dream  or  see  a  ghost,  we  certainly  do  have 
the  sensations  we  think  we  have,  but  for 
various  reasons  it  is  held  that  no  physical 
object  corresponds  to  these  sensations.  Thus 
the  certainty  of  our  knowledge  of  our  own 
experiences  does  not  have  to  be  limited  in 
any  way  to  allow  for  exceptional  cases.  Here, 
therefore,  we  have,  for  what  it  is  worth,  a 
solid  basis  from  which  to  begin  our  pursuit 
of  knowledge. 

The  problem  we  have  to  consider  is  this  : 
Granted  that  we  are  certain  of  our  own  sense- 
data,  have  we  any  reason  for  regarding  them 
as  signs  of  the  existence  of  something  else, 
which  we  can  call  the  physical  object?  When 
we  have  enumerated  all  the  sense-data  which 


THE  EXISTENCE   OF  MATTER    81 

we  should  naturally  regard  as  connected  with 
the  table,  have  we  said  all  there  is  to  say 
about  the  table,  or  is  there  still  something 
else — something  not  a  sense-datum,  some- 
thing which  persists  when  we  go  out  of  the 
room?  Common  sense  unhesitatingly  answers 
that  there  is.  What  can  be  bought  and  sold 
and  pushed  about  and  have  a  cloth  laid  on  it, 
and  so  on,  cannot  be  a  mere  collection  of  sense- 
data.  If  the  cloth  completely  hides  the 
table,  we  shall  derive  no  sense-data  from 
the  table,  and  therefore,  if  the  table  were 
merely  sense-data,  it  would  have  ceased  to 
exist,  and  the  cloth  would  be  suspended  in 
empty  air,  resting,  by  a  miracle,  in  the  place 
where  the  table  formerly  was.  This  seems 
plainly  absurd  ;  but  whoever  wishes  to  be- 
come a  philosopher  must  learn  not  to  be 
frightened  by  absurdities. 

One  great  reason  why  it  is  felt  that  we  must 
secure  a  physical  object  in  addition  to  the 
sense-data,  is  that  we  want  the  same  object 
for  different  people.  When  ten  people  are 
sitting  round  a  dinner-table,  it  seems  pre- 
posterous   to    maintain   that    they    are    not 


32    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

seeing  the  same  tablecloth,  the  same  knives 
and  forks  and  spoons  and  glasses.  But  the 
sense-data  are  private  to  each  separate  person ; 
what  is  immediately  present  to  the  sight 
of  one  is  not  immediately  present  to  the 
sight  of  another  :  they  all  see  things  from 
slightly  different  points  of  view,  and  therefore 
see  them  slightly  differently.  Thus,  if  there 
are  to  be  public  neutral  objects,  which  can  be 
in  some  sense  known  to  many  different  people, 
there  must  be  something  over  and  above  the 
private  and  particular  sense-data  which  ap- 
pear to  various  people.  What  reason,  then, 
have  we  for  believing  that  there  are  such 
public  neutral  objects  ? 

The  first  answer  that  naturally  occurs  to 
one  is  that,  although  different  people  may 
see  the  table  slightly  differently,  still  they  all 
see  more  or  less  similar  things  when  they 
look  at  the  table,  and  the  variations  in  what 
they  see  follow  the  laws  of  perspective  and 
reflection  of  light,  so  that  it  is  easy  to  arrive 
at  a  permanent  object  underlying  all  the  dif- 
ferent people's  sense-data.  I  bought  my  table 
from  the  former  occupant  of  my  room  ;    I 


THE   EXISTENCE   OF  MATTER    33 

could  not  buy  his  sense-data,  which  died 
when  he  went  away,  but  I  could  and  did  buy 
the  confident  expectation  of  more  or  less 
similar  sense-data.  Thus  it  is  the  fact  that 
different  people  have  similar  sense-data,  and 
that  one  person  in  a  given  place  at  different 
times  has  similar  sense-data,  which  makes 
us  suppose  that  over  and  above  the  sense- 
data  there  is  a  permanent  public  object  which 
underlies  or  causes  the  sense-data  of  various 
people  and  various  times. 

Now  in  so  far  as  the  above  considerations 
depend  upon  supposing  that  there  are  other 
people  besides  ourselves,  they  beg  the  very 
question  at  issue.  Other  people  are  repre- 
sented to  me  by  certain  sense-data,  such  as 
the  sight  of  them  or  the  sound  of  their  voices, 
and  if  I  had  no  reason  to  believe  that  there 
were  physical  objects  independent  of  my 
sense-data,  I  should  have  no  reason  to  believe 
that  other  people  exist  except  as  part  of  my 
dream.  Thus,  when  we  are  trying  to  show  that 
there  must  be  objects  independent  of  our  own 
sense-data,  we  cannot  appeal  to  the  testimony 
of  other  people,  since  this  testimony  itself 

B 


34    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

consists  of  sense-data,  and  does  not  reveal 
other  people's  experiences  unless  our  own 
sense-data  are  signs  of  things  existing  inde- 
oendently  of  us.  We  must  therefore,  if 
possible,  find,  in  our  own  purely  private 
experiences,  characteristics  which  show,  or 
tend  to  show,  that  there  are  in  the  world 
things  other  than  ourselves  and  our  private 
experiences. 

In  one  sense  it  must  be  admitted  that  we 
can  never  prove  the  existence  of  things  other 
than  ourselves  and  our  experiences.  No 
logical  absurdity  results  from  the  hypothesis 
that  the  world  consists  of  myself  and  my 
thoughts  and  feelings  and  sensations,  and 
that  everything  else  is  mere  fancy.  In 
dreams  a  very  complicated  world  may  seem 
to  be  present,  and  yet  on  waking  we  find  it 
was  a  delusion  ;  that  is  to  say,  we  find  that 
the  sense-data  in  the  dream  do  not  appear  to 
have  corresponded  with  such  physical  objects 
as  we  should  naturally  infer  from  our  sense- 
data.  (It  is  true  that,  when  the  physical 
world  is  assumed,  it  is  possible  to  find  physical 
causes  for  the  sense-data  in  dreams  :    a  door 


THE  EXISTENCE  OF  MATTER    35 

banging,  for  instance,  may  cause  us  to  dream 
of  a  naval  engagement.  But  although,  in 
this  case,  there  is  a  physical  cause  for  the 
sense-data,  there  is  not  a  physical  object 
corresponding  to  the  sense-data  in  the  way  in 
which  an  actual  naval  battle  would  corre- 
spond.) There  is  no  logical  impossibility  in 
the  supposition  that  the  whole  of  life  is  a 
dream,  in  which  we  ourselves  create  all  the 
objects  that  come  before  us.  But  although 
this  is  not  logically  impossible,  there  is  no 
reason  whatever  to  suppose  that  it  is  true ; 
and  it  is,  in  fact,  a  less  simple  hypothesis, 
viewed  as  a  means  of  accounting  for  the 
facts  of  our  own  life,  than  the  common-sense 
hypothesis  that  there  really  are  objects  inde- 
pendent of  us,  whose  action  on  us  causes  our 
sensations. 

The  way  in  which  simplicity  comes  in  from 
supposing  that  there  really  are  physical 
objects  is  easily  seen.  If  the  cat  appears  at 
one  moment  in  one  part  of  the  room,  and  at 
another  in  another  part,  it  is  natural  to 
suppose  that  it  has  moved  from  the  one  to 
the  other,  passing  over  a  series  of  intermediate 


36    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

positions.  But  if  it  is  merely  a  set  of  sense- 
data,  it  cannot  have  ever  been  in  any  place 
where  I  did  not  see  it ;  thus  we  shall  have 
to  suppose  that  it  did  not  exist  at  all  while 
I  was  not  looking,  but  suddenly  sprang  into 
being  in  a  new  place.  If  the  cat  exists 
whether  I  see  it  or  not,  we  can  understand 
from  our  own  experience  how  it  gets  hungry 
between  one  meal  and  the  next ;  but  if  it 
does  not  exist  when  I  am  not  seeing  it,  it 
seems  odd  that  appetite  should  grow  during 
non-existence  as  fast  as  during  existence. 
And  if  the  cat  consists  only  of  sense-data,  it 
cannot  be  hungry,  since  no  hunger  but  my 
own  can  be  a  sense-datum  to  me.  Thus 
the  behaviour  of  the  sense-data  which  repre- 
sent the  cat  to  me,  though  it  seems  quite 
natural  when  regarded  as  an  expression  of 
hunger,  becomes  utterly  inexplicable  when 
regarded  as  mere  movements  and  changes 
of  patches  of  colour,  which  are  as  incapable 
of  hunger  as  a  triangle  is  of  playing  foot- 
ball. 

But  the  difficulty  in  the  case  of  the  cat  is 
nothing  compared  to  the  difTiculty  in  the  case 


THE   EXISTENCE   OF  MATTER    37 

of  human  beings.  When  human  beings  speak 
— that  is,  when  we  hear  certain  noises  which 
we  associate  with  ideas,  and  simultaneously 
see  certain  motions  of  lips  and  expressions  of 
face — it  is  very  difficult  to  suppose  that  what 
we  hear  is  not  the  expression  of  a  thought, 
as  we  know  it  would  be  if  we  emitted  the 
same  sounds.  Of  course  similar  things  happen 
in  dreams,  where  we  are  mistaken  as  to  the 
existence  of  other  people.  But  dreams  are 
more  or  less  suggested  by  what  we  call  waking 
life,  and  are  capable  of  being  more  or  less 
accounted  for  on  scientific  principles  if  we 
assume  that  there  really  is  a  physical 
world.  Thus  every  principle  of  simplicity 
urges  us  to  adopt  the  natural  view,  that 
there  really  are  objects  other  than  our 
selves  and  our  sense-data  which  have  an 
existence  not  dependent  upon  our  perceiving 
them. 

Of  course  it  is  not  by  argument  that  we 
originally  come  by  our  belief  in  an  independent 
external  world.  We  find  this  belief  ready 
in  ourselves  as  soon  as  we  begin  to  reflect : 
it  is  what  may  be  called  an  instinctive  belief 


38    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

We  should  never  have  been  led  to  question 
this  belief  but  for  the  fact  that,  at  any  rate 
in  the  case  of  sight,  it  seems  as  if  the  sense- 
datum  itself  were  instinctively  believed  to 
be  the  independent  object,  whereas  argument 
shows  that  the  object  cannot  be  identical 
with  the  sense-datum.  This  discovery,  how- 
ever— which  is  not  at  all  paradoxical  in  the 
case  of  taste  and  smell  and  sound,  and  only 
slightly  so  in  the  case  of  touch — leaves  un- 
diminished our  instinctive  belief  that  there 
are  objects  corresponding  to  our  sense-data. 
Since  this  belief  does  not  lead  to  any  diffi- 
culties, but  on  the  contrary  tends  to  simplify 
and  systematise  our  account  of  our  experi- 
ences, there  seems  no  good  reason  for  rejecting 
it.  We  may  therefore  admit — though  with 
a  slight  doubt  derived  from  dreams — that 
the  external  world  does  really  exist,  and  is  not 
wholly  dependent  for  its  existence  upon  our 
continuing  to  perceive  it. 

The  argument  which  has  led  us  to  this  con- 
clusion is  doubtless  less  strong  than  we  could 
wish,  but  it  is  typical  of  many  philosophical 
arguments,  and  it  is  therefore  worth  while  to 


THE   EXISTENCE   OF   MATTER    39 

consider  briefly  its  general  character  and 
validity.  All  knowledge,  we  find,  must  be 
built  up  upon  our  instinctive  beliefs,  and  if 
these  are  rejected,  nothing  is  left.  But  among 
our  instinctive  beliefs  some  are  much  stronger 
than  others,  while  many  have,  by  habit  and 
association,  become  entangled  with  other 
beliefs,  not  really  instinctive,  but  falsely 
supposed  to  be  part  of  what  is  believed 
instinctively. 

Philosophy  should  show  us  the  hierarchy 
of  our  instinctive  beliefs,  beginning  with 
those  we  hold  most  strongly,  and  presenting 
each  as  much  isolated  and  as  free  from  irrele- 
vant additions  as  possible.  It  should  take 
care  to  show  that,  in  the  form  in  which  they 
are  finally  set  forth,  our  instinctive  beliefs 
do  not  clash,  but  form  a  harmonious  system. 
There  can  never  be  any  reason  for  rejecting 
one  instinctive  belief  except  that  it  clashes 
with  others  ;  thus,  if  they  are  found  to  har- 
monise, the  whole  system  becomes  worthy  of 
acceptance. 

It  is  of  course  possible  that  all  or  any  of  our 
beliefs  may  be  mistaken,  and  therefore  all 


40    THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

ought  to  be  held  with  at  least  some  slight 
element  of  doubt.  But  we  cannot  have 
reason  to  reject  a  belief  except  on  the 
ground  of  some  other  belief.  Hence,  by 
organising  our  instinctive  beliefs  and  their 
consequences,  by  considering  which  among 
them  it  is  most  possible,  if  necessary,  to 
modify  or  abandon,  we  can  arrive,  on 
the  basis  of  accepting  as  our  sole  data 
what  we  instinctively  believe,  at  an  or- 
derly systematic  organisation  of  our  know- 
ledge, in  which,  though  the  possibility  of 
error  remains,  its  likelihood  is  diminished 
by  the  interrelation  of  the  parts  and  by 
the  critical  scrutiny  which  has  preceded 
acquiescence. 

This  function,  at  least,  philosophy  can  per- 
form. Most  philosophers,  rightly  or  wrongly, 
believe  that  philosophy  can  do  much  more 
than  this — that  it  can  give  us  knowledge, 
not  otherwise  attainable,  concerning  the 
universe  as  a  whole,  and  concerning  the  nature 
of  ultimate  reality.  Whether  this  be  the 
case  or  not,  the  more  modest  function  we  have 
spoken   of   can    certainly    be   performed    by 


THE  EXISTENCE  OF  MATTER      41 

philosophy,  and  certainly  suffices,  for  those 
who  have  once  begun  to  doubt  the  adequacy 
of  common  sense,  to  justify  the  arduous  and 
difficult  labours  that  philosophical  problems 
involve. 
